“To a grammarian, text is a rich, many-faceted phenomenon that ‘means’ in many different ways.
It can be explored from many different points of view. But we can distinguish two main angles of
vision: one, focus on the text as an object in its own right; two, focus on the text as an instrument
for finding out about something else. Focusing on text as an object, a grammarian will be asking
questions such as: Why is it valued as it is? Focusing on text as instrument, the grammarian will
be asking what the text reveals about the system of the language in which it is spoken or written.”
Halliday and Matthiessen (2004: 3)
1. Establishing the Study
Halliday and Matthiessen above state that “text is a rich, many-faceted phenomenon that ‘means’ in
different ways” and this study adopts the same viewpoint: language is rich and it is full of meaning. This
thesis focuses on ‘text as an instrument’ and aims to reveal the generic structure of written-to-be-
spoken language within the discourse of politics. The study postulates that sub-genres exist within the
genre of political discourse and can be revealed by investigating the generic structure of political
speeches.
This study takes the standpoint that genre is “a staged, goal oriented, purposeful activity in which
speakers engage as members of our culture” (Martin 1984: 25). It is further elaborated as “a staged,
goal-oriented social process. Social, because we participate in genres with other people; goal-oriented,
because we use genres to get things done; staged, because it usually takes us a few steps to reach our
goals” (Martin & Rose 2007: 8). Sub-genre is interpreted as a genre belonging to an already established
genre. And this study sees this corpus, the American presidential radio addresses, as a genre within
political discourse and the data of this study as possible sub-genres of the radio address. In order to
illustrate genre, the research examines the generic structure of such speeches and proposes a functional
approach of analysing the thematic structure by way of Theme and Rheme, which is part of the textual
metafunction of systemic functional linguistics (SFL) (Halliday 1994; Halliday and Matthiessen 2004;
Eggins 2004; Thompson 2004).
1
In order to study the goal, social purpose and generic structure of written-to-be-spoken language of
political discourse, study investigates the genre of the American Presidential radio address by way of a
Thematic structure analysis. The radio address is its own genre within political discourse and it is
embedded in the context of American culture. Scacci (2011) states, “genres exist in relation to certain
situational constraints, the weekly address is unique in its routine response to the week’s events
packaged for both public and press consumption”. The radio address thus is realised, operates and has
expected functions within the context of an American president and Americans are familiar with the
radio address due to its long history and tradition.
There has been research on the presidential weekly radio address, but there is a gap of linguistic
investigation of this genre. Martin (1984) researched Reagan’s return to the radio address, he revealed
that Reagan felt other forms of communication, such a news conferences, were more restrictive and
thus Reagan felt he was able to speak freely and be publically more present. Horvit, Schiffer, and Wright
(2008) investigated the Sunday press coverage of the radio address from 1982 to 2005. Since the
address is delivered on Saturdays, they found that the Sunday press coverage diminished over this time
period including the number of paragraphs citing the president. Meernik and Ault (2013) researched
the radio address from the perspective of foreign policy. They argued presidents have the ability to
manipulate the agenda of foreign policy and make more tactical choices by placing more attention on
domestic issues within the radio address. Han (2006) looked into the radio address as an old medium
combined with new strategies, thus comparing the addresses of Reagan and Clinton. Jones and Rowland
(2009) analysed the thematic overviews of Reagan’s addresses and researched his rhetorical strategies
and ideology. Research more from a language perspective, Oddo (2011) investigated ‘us’ versus ‘them’
through critical intertextual analysis (Thibault 1991), and compared the addresses of F.D. Roosevelt
and G.W. Bush through their legitimization strategies, thus establishing that Bush was among many
who misled the public into war. Oddo delved into the language of the addresses but did not contain any
linguistic analysis especially not to mention from an SFL perspective. Moreover, Scacco (2011) analysed
Obama’s radio address, but from a ritualistic rhetoric standpoint, and compared Obama’s addresses to
that of Clinton’s to understand how they both projected their presidencies onto the public, again, not
from a perspective of linguistics. Thus, there has been research on the radio address, but none from a
strictly functional linguistic perspective. The present study aims to fill this gap within studies of this
particular genre.
The present study focusses on the Radio Addresses of President Barack Obama during his first term as
President, 2009-2012. It concentrates on 4 different contexts of situations (repertoires) of the radio in
order to investigate the possibility of sub-genres within this genre: the economy (4 addresses);
2
healthcare (4 addresses); man-inflicted tragedies (4 addresses); and Christmas (4 addresses).
Ultimately, the study demonstrates that the generic structures of these addresses do vary according to
context of situation and that it is possible to establish a sub-genre within the Radio Address. Below,
Figure 1.1 visualises this:
Genre: American Presidential Radio Address
Sub-Genres of the American Presidential Radio Address:
The Economy Health Care Man-Inflicted Tragedy Christmas
Figure 1.1: Demonstrating Genre to Sub-genre
This introductory chapter will first explain the functions of language, politics and discourse. Secondly, it
will state reasons for studying the grammar of political discourse. Next, the main theoretical concepts of
the study will be mapped out, from genre, cline of instantiation to context of situation. Fourth, the
overall research objective will be addressed. This includes the research questions, the data, the
analytical tool, the prospective results and the importance of the study. Finally, the structure of the
overall thesis will be explained.
1.2 The Function of Language, Politics, and Discourse
The function and connection between language and any social activity is inherent, since “the nature of
language has to be functional since language grows out of languaging and languaging itself is a form of
social life” (Hasan 2001: 4). Social activities encompass many diverse events both written and spoken,
such as greetings, cards, service encounters, casual conversations, arguments, telephone enquiries,
instructions, lectures, debates, plays, jokes, or games (Martin and Rose 2007: 8). All types of social
activities are related to different contexts of situations, and language is needed to communicate
according to the various contexts. Thus, the construction of language is dependent on the context in
which it was produced. Halliday (2009:56) explains that language provides the means by which we act
as well as reflect on the environment. Further, Hasan (2001: 8) maintains that context (of situation) is
important in two ways, first in shaping language as a system and then highlighting language as a
process.
This study stresses the importance of language, grammar, and the construction thereof within the
context of political discourse. The term discourse may be described as “anything beyond a clause”
(Schiffrin et al 2001:1). De Beaugrande (Rankema 2004: 49-50) has identified seven criteria for
textuality: (1) cohesion, (2) coherence, (3) intentionality, (4) acceptability, (5) informativeness, (6)
3
situationailty, (7) intertextuality. Further, political discourse can be defined as discourse produced by
actors or authors that commonly include politicians or political institutions (van Dijk 1997: 12).
According to van Dijk (2008: 90), political discourse includes “members of more powerful social groups
and institutions, and especially their leaders, have more or less exclusive access to and control over, one
or more types of public discourse”.
This functional connection between the social activity of politics and discourse is seen in Figure 1.2
below (Miller 2005: 4). The outer circle shows the social activity of politics and is then realised (and
dependent) on the language of political discourse in the second circle. The second circle shows the
dependent link that discourse has on the context in which it is produced. Further, in order for political
discourse to be realized in the second circle, it has a dependency on language and its grammar, noted in
the third most inner circle. Thus, the discourse is dependent on the language and grammar and its
variable options offered for the discourse to be constructed and produced within a ‘political’ context.
Social
Activity of
Politics
Political
Discourse
Language/
Grammar
Figure 1.2: connecting social activity to grammar adapted from Miller (2005: 4)
The third and innermost circle of language and grammar is explained according to the systemic
functional perspective (Halliday 2009: 341) as “that level of linguistic form at which operates closed
systems”, and includes four underlying categories: unit, structure, class, and system. Eggins and Slade
(2005: 48) state:
one of the most powerful aspects of the systemic approach is that language is viewed as a
resource for making not just one meaning at a time but several strands of meaning simultaneously. The
simultaneous layers of meaning can be identified in linguistic units of all sizes: in the word, phrase,
clause, sentence, and text.
4
The thesis investigates the layers of meaning in the grammatical unit of the clause of each radio
address. The following section will highlight some reasons for studying the grammar of political
discourse.
1.2.1 Why Study the Grammar of Political discourse?
The study of grammar is important. Halliday (2009: 51) poses the question: “what are the enabling
factors of grammar that make grammar such an enticing field to explore?” And he (ibid: 51-52)
immediately responds and sums up the answer in six concise salient points:
(1) They are comprehensive: they can ‘mean’ anything we want.
(2) They are extravagant: they always pack extra power.
(3) They are telescopic: they carry their history with them.
(4) They are non-autonomous: they interact with their environment.
(5) They are variable: they change under differing conditions.
(6) They are indeterminate: they work with approximations and tendencies.
Incorporating Halliday’s summation with the study of political discourse, the following six points are
directly connected to political discourse. First, “they are comprehensive: they can ‘mean’ anything we
want”. Within political discourse control is a prominent feature and, van Dijk (2008: 90) notes that
public leaders are able to access and control one or more variations of public discourse. In its potential
for meaning ‘anything we want’, the grammar of language can be manipulated by politicians in such a
way to make it mean exactly how they want it to mean. Thus, they have control over the production of
the discourse they produce.
Secondly, Halliday says “they are extravagant: they always pack extra power”. Power is a strong feature
of political discourse. Chilton (2004: 3) views politics as a ‘struggle for power’ between those who are
in a position of authority and ‘those who seek to resist it’. To reiterate van Dijk’s (2008: 90) point,
“members of more powerful social groups and institutions” are the ones that have the power to
produce political discourse. They are able to embed power into discourse, for example, by the use of
evaluative language, pronouns, metaphors and modality. Thus, this second point is connects to the
notion of power and political discourse because grammar has an extravagant way of packing power
within the production of language.
Third, he states “they are telescopic: they carry their history with them”. Political discourse has a long
history, it traces back to Aristotle’s ethos, pathos and logos: ethos pertaining to persuasion, pathos
5
appealing to the audience’s emotions, and logos presenting ideas logically (Campbell 1998; Miller
1993). Throughout time, political discourse has continuously perfected itself in its production and
construction, including the opportunity for politicians to have learned from others’ examples of
effective or of not so effective ways of communicating. As an example, the data of this study, the radio
address was first delivered in 1933 and every president since then has delivered a radio address,
including Obama. Therefore, it has had eighty-two years (as of 2017) to be continuously perfected
throughout the last 14 presidents (including the current President).
Points four and five are here explained concurrently, (4) “they are non-autonomous: they interact with
their environment” and (5) “they are variable: they change under differing conditions”. As mentioned,
language is produced out of given contexts, Thompson (2004: 10) believes that we are able to tell a
great deal about the context in which language was produced, why it was produced, and the reasons it
was expressed in a particular way. However, the contexts of politics are always changing and language
changes according to various situations, for example it may be a campaign speech, an inaugural speech
to begin a new administration or a radio address wishing the American people a merry Christmas. Thus,
Halliday’s points four and five are applicable to political discourse, for political discourse does both
“interact with their environment” and “change under differing conditions”.
The last and final point offered by Halliday is grammar “(is) indeterminate: it work(s) with
approximations and tendencies”. As grammar is indeterminate, so is political discourse: text is
constructed differently depending on the context. As mentioned above, it may be a campaign speech, an
inaugural address or a radio address. Thus, approximations and tendencies are found in political
discourse. These approximations and tendencies can be seen through common patterning: metaphors
(Beard 2000; Chilton 2004; Lakoff 1991), metaphor of war (Lakoff 2000), pronouns (Brown and Gilman
1960), rule of 3 (Thomas et al 2004) and metonymy (Beard 2000; Chilton 2004) (discussed in chapter
two). The following section maps out the main theoretical concepts of the thesis.
1.3 The Overall Study: Mapping the Research
While the previous section explained the function of language and political discourse, this section maps
out the overall structure of this study and addresses the important notions that are discussed
throughout the thesis. Figure 1.2 demonstrated the dependency between the social activity of politics,
the discourse of politics and the language/grammar produced as a result of political discourse; this
section delves into these notions on a functional theoretical level. Figure 1.3 above visually
demonstrates the study by mapping out the discussions that will sequentially be developed throughout
the following chapters. The following four points on the graph are discussed by walking one through
6
the study and demonstrate how the they are theoretically linked: (1) Genre and Generic Structuring
(Context of Culture); (2) The Cline of Instantiation; (3) Instances of Text (Register/Context of Situation);
(4) Then the data, different contexts of situation, economy, healthcare, man-inflicted tragedies, Christmas,
which are analysed in this study.
Genre:
Radio Address
Context of Culture
(Social activity)
Genre Structuring
(the steps needed
to reach the goal
of the genre)
1
One Instance of Written/Spoken Sub Potential Instance Type Established System of
Text (sub-genre) Language Potential
(a discourse according to one Demonstrated through a repertoire evident through the context of
particular context of situation – of similar registers culture
Register, Field, Tenor, Mode: (grouping of similar discourses) (Discourse + Grammar)
Ideational, Interpersonal, Textual)
CLINE OF INSTANTIATION 2
3
7
x(
YMONOCE
EHT
)4
)4
x(
ERACHTLAEH
DETCILFNI-NAM
)4
X(
SEIDEGART
)4
x(
SAMTSIRHC
ß4
Figure 1.3: Mapping the Research adapted from Halliday and Matthiessen (2004: 27)
Genre and Generic Structuring
First, the study begins with the notion of genre (box 1), genre was referred to as a ‘social activity’ in
figure 1.2; for the rest of this study the notion of social activity within language will be referred to as
genre. As mentioned, this study refers to genre as a staged, goal-oriented and a social process (Martin &
Rose 2007: 8). It can be identified as part of the context of culture that it is realized, for culture is
embedded within genre. Culture can be viewed as a social-semiotic system which includes features that
constitute the systems and processes of an established culture (Halliday 2009: 243). Further, discourse
(text) in relation to context is an interaction that sets out to achieve a particular goal within culture,
thus initiating a text of a particular genre. And text will then most probably unfold in a certain way
(Eggins and Martin 1997: 236).
Within box number 1 in Figure 1.3 is genre and the embedded box of ‘generic structuring’. Generic
structuring inherently connects to genre, for it demonstrates the necessary stages needed in order to
reach the goal of any given genre. Coffin et al (2010:252) define generic structuring as the following:
[…] its unfolding organization (that) can be more usefully viewed from a functional perspective.
(This) provides insight into how different genres enable language users to achieve their social purposes
by moving through distinct functional stages.
The written-to-be spoken discourse that occurs within this specific genre has an expected structure, in
other words, it has its own generic structure, it follows in order to reach the goal of any particular radio
address. An example of a general generic structure may be as follows: introduction + the most current
event of the week or the most urgent matter needing to be addressed to the nation + conclusion. These
notions of genre and generic structuring are further explained in chapter three.
Cline of Instantiation
Directly beneath box number one of ‘genre and generic structuring’, is box number two, the ‘Established
System of Language Potential’. This box connects to the other two boxes, (from readers right to left)
‘Sub Potential Instance type’ and ‘One instance of written/spoken text’ (box 3). These three boxes are
sequentially connected and are known as the cline of instantiation. Halliday (2009: 162) generally
interprets a cline as graduations and continuities and does not view them as discrete classes but as a
continuous scale. Further, Halliday and Matthiessen (2004: 27) explain the cline of instantiation as
follows:
Patterns (that) can be viewed either from the system pole as sub-systems (right), or from the
instance pole, as instance types (left). If we start at the instance pole, we can study a single text and then
look for other texts that are like it according to certain criteria. When we study this sample of texts, we
can identify patterns that they all share, and describe these in terms of text type. By identifying a text
type, we are moving along the cline of instantiation away from the text pole towards the system pole.
This study applies Halliday’s notion of cline of instantiation for the purpose of investigating the
possibility of sub-genres within the radio address. Indicated in the box on the right, is the established
system of language potential, which this study connects and argues is inherently connected to the
notion of genre and generic structure. And, as is being here discussed, one example of an established
8
genre is the radio address. The study begins from the notion of genre, from varying situations within
this already established genre, because particular contexts of situation, with both general and specific
purposes within language, functions within ‘typical conglomerations of linguistic resources’ (Miller
2017: 16). The study discusses how a cluster of singular texts, as seen on the left, ‘One instance of
written/spoken text’, may have the potential to move towards the right of the cline to ‘sub potential type’
and finally to the ‘established system of language potential’ which could then lead to a potential sub-
genre within an established genre.
Instances of Text and the Analysis
In box number three, one instance of written or spoken text, is ‘text’ (language) seen from a close point of
view, showing instances taken from the potential of a particular text (Halliday 2009: 236). This step of
the study brings an instance of text to the level of context of situation. Context of situation can be
recognised by working bottom-up through text, such as that of a single radio address. A single radio
address can then be grouped together according to similar contexts of situations. Box number four
demonstrates the varying contexts of situation analysed in this study (economy, healthcare, man-
inflicted tragedies, Christmas) to determine the potential of sub-genres within these varying contexts.
Genre is inherently connected to context as mentioned, Eggins and Martin (1997: 236) state it is “an
interactant setting out to achieve a particular cultural goal (that) is most likely to initiate a text of a
particular genre, and that text is most likely to unfold in a particular way”. Here to reiterate, they state
that a particular genre will most likely unfold in a certain way. They (ibid) continue to say, “but the
potential for alternatives is inherent in the dialogic relationship between language and context.” Thus,
there is a possibility for alternatives within an established genre, and this study aims to investigate the
possibilities of alternatives within a genre.
Linked to the level of context of situation is the notion of register (Halliday 1979; Halliday and
Matthiessen 2004; Eggins and Martin 1997; Thompson 2004; Lukin 2008; Miller 2017) and its three
variables: field, tenor, and mode (discussed in chapter three). For the moment, one can state that
Halliday (1979: 201) defines register as “relevant features of a situation in which language has some
place are the field of social process, the tenor of social relationships and the mode of discourse itself”:
that is (i) what is going on, (ii) who are involved, and (iii) what part the text is playing – whether
written or spoken, in what rhetorical mode and so on; field answers: what is the text about, tenor
answers: who is taking part in the discourse, and mode answers: how is the language being used, what
realization resources are being used (written, spoken, visual resources, multimodal).
9
The field, tenor, and mode of the data are the following: field is President Obama speaking to the nation
regarding the most current events of the week; tenor is the US president speaking to the American
people (including Congress or his administration); and mode is written-to-be-spoken discourse,
presented in multimodal ways (the radio, video, internet, written transcripts). At this level of genre, it
does not reveal much about specific contexts of situation. Thus, by emphasizing register, the study will
investigate varying contexts of situation, to understand if sub-genres will emerge. For example, what is
the register when President Obama specifically speaks about the economy? Or what is the register
when he wishes the nation a happy holiday for Christmas?
1.3.1 Overall Research objective and Research Questions
To recapitulate, this study postulates that sub-genres exist within diverse contexts of situation within
the same genre of American radio address. The overall objective is concerned with the functional
perspective of genre in regards to the data. The aim is to reveal possible sub genres of political
discourse in varying contexts within this discourse by investigating the generic structure of the radio
address. Theme and Rheme, the strand of textual meaning of SFL, is proposed as an effective tool to
reveal the generic structures of the data.
The research questions of the study are as follows:
1. Are there potential sub-genres within the genre of the American presidential radio address?
2. Does the context of situation play a vital role in determining the possibility of sub-genres? If so,
to what extent does the stability of a contextual situation influence the stability of a possible
sub-genre and/or vice versa?
3. How then to reveal sub-genres within a genre? Would an analysis of the generic structure of the
addresses be a viable option?
4. Further, to investigate the generic structure, would Theme/Rheme analysis be an effective
method in determining the generic structure?
1.3.2 Data and Methods Summary
Data
In order to investigate the above theoretical questions, this study analysed the American Presidential
Radio Address. It is a weekly radio address of the President of America to keep the American people
informed of the current events of the week. It began with President Franklin D. Roosevelt, and since
10
him, every U.S. president has used this form of communication, including Barack Obama. The study
analysed the radio addresses of President Obama during his first term as President, 2009-2012. Obama
delivered a total of 205 addresses (see appendix for list of all 205) during his first term. In this research,
there are four different groupings of the radio address delivered by Obama: the economy (4 addresses);
health care (4 addresses); man-inflicted tragedies (4 addresses); and Christmas (4 addresses). The data
has been systematically chosen, for example the economy comprises his first 4 addresses delivered on
the economy; health care includes his first 4 addresses delivered on this topic; man-inflicted tragedies
covers his only 4 addresses delivered on these type of tragedies during his first term; and Christmas
comprises his only 4 addresses delivered on Christmas during his first term. Thus, the study focuses on
4 varying contexts of situation to investigate the possibility of sub-genres within this genre. This will be
further discussed in detail in chapter four.
Methods
SFL concerns itself with revealing ‘how the organization of language’ is related to function. It models
“language and social context as a semiotic system in relationship to realization with one another”
(Martin 1997: 4). It is elaborated by a social context model and “language metaredound” (Lemke 1995),
meaning “social context comprises patterns of language patterns” (Martin 1997: 4). SFL investigates
patterning of language. As Eggins and Slade (2006: 48) state, “the systemic model is rich in analytical
techniques, allowing the analyst to focus on those patterns which are most relevant to specific data and
research interests.”
The above paragraphs explained the functional perspective of genre and generic structuring. Cline of
instantiation was introduced to visually demonstrate how an instance of text can move up the cline and
become a recognizable system of language, genre. Register, context of situation (Field, Tenor, Mode),
was introduced as a way to reveal texts in specific contexts.
The three variables of register (field, tenor, mode) are linguistically realized through the metafunctions
of SFL: ideational, interpersonal, and textual. Each of which are explained in brief simplistic terms:
Ideational is how one views the world and is linguistically realised through verbal processes
(transitivity), the Interpersonal relates to social interaction and is linguistically realised via the mood
system (subject and finite), modality, and the appraisal system (the language of evaluation). And last,
the Ideational and Interpersonal metafunctions are held together by the Textual metafunction, for one
“negotiate(s) ways of talking about that world: what kind of texts we can construct to represent
ideational and interpersonal meaning” (Eggins and Slade 2006: 50-51). The textual metafunction is
11
realised through cohesive devises such as conjunctions, and reference as well as the thematic structure
(Theme and Rheme).
Part of the textual metafunction of SFL is Theme/Rheme. It is used as the analytical tool to reveal the
generic structure of the data. It is used to answer if similar types of addresses can be identified as a sub-
genre. Theme is the ‘starting-point’ of the message; thus it determines what the clause is going to be
about (Halliday 1994: 38). Lipson (2006:147) explains that “it is part of the clause that is given special
textual status; Theme is what I, the speaker, have chosen for the message.” Theme gives the clause its
character as a message, it reveals the flow of the message and what the speaker or the writer decides to
place in the beginning of a clause in order to gain particular emphasis (Halliday 1994: 38). This study
argues that Theme/Rheme is the most effective tool to use to determine the generic structure of the
data; to determine if patternings are similar with other patternings which may then result in a possible
sub-genre. These methods are further explained in chapter three.
1.3.3 Research Parameters
The study focuses on the notion of genre and generic structuring of political discourse from a systemic
functional linguistic perspective by using Theme/Rheme of the textual metafunction. This work does
not include such fields of study as American Presidential Rhetoric (Campbell & Jamieson 1990; Hart
1984; Snyder & Higgins 1990; Stuckey 1989; Windt 1983), which is a vast field of its own. However, the
study recognises previous research on political discourse, for example, the use of pronouns (Wilson
1990; Chilton & Schaffner 1997; Fairclough 2003; Chilton 2004), common patternings found in political
speeches (Hart 1986), such as metaphors, metaphor of war (Lakoff 2000), and rule of 3 (Jones and
Peccei 2004). The study further recognises the importance of understanding the notion of power within
political discourse from the fields of critical discourse analysis (CDA) and political discourse analysis
(PDA). Power plays a large part in the content of these addresses, but it does not play a vital role within
the analysis of the generic structure of each individual address. Political discourse will be discussed in
chapter two. Specifically, this research focuses on four diverse ‘repertoires of registers’, with each
repertoire comprising of four radio address topics: (1) the economy, (2) healthcare, (3) man-inflicted
tragedy and (4) Christmas. Each address within each repertoire was analysed for Theme/Rheme to
determine its generic structure and then was compared and contrasted to the other addresses within
that topic to investigate the hypothesis that they are similar in generic structure, thus a potential sub-
genre. Further, to highlight the possible sub-genre of one repertoire of registers, the generic structures
of each repertoire of registers were then contrasted with the other repertoires to reveal how they
unfold differently when compared to the others.
12
1.3.4 Importance of Study and Prospective Results
The importance of this study is threefold. First, it reveals the generic structure of political speeches by
demonstrating the effectiveness of Theme/Rheme within SFL as an analytical tool. Secondly, it
highlights the notion of context of situation within political discourse, it establishes the importance of
register and its three variables (field, tenor, mode) according to different ‘contexts of political situations’
within discourse. And thirdly, the study shows how the structure of political speeches changes
according to the context in which speeches are given, thus establishing the notion of sub-genres.
The analysis reveals, from the four different categories that the more stable the situation was, the more
stable the generic structure was for that group of addresses. For example, the Christmas addresses
resulted in a very stable and expected generic structure, as the register of the context of situation for
Christmas does not change. Another somewhat stable situation was the register on the economy, where
President Obama persistently fought for the passing of the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act
(ARRA). These addresses had a somewhat stable generic structure since the register of them were
similar.
1.4 Structure of the Thesis
This thesis is divided into the following nine chapters. Chapter two will review previous research on
political discourse, such as the ideology of power (CDA, PDA), common patternings found in political
speeches and the most recent research on the notion of genre and political discourse. Chapter three will
discuss genre and the notion of context of culture. It will explain generic structuring and its inherent
relation to genre within relation to SFL. Then, the three metafunctions of SFL, Ideational, Interpersonal,
Textual, will be discussed. The Textual metafunction will be strongly emphasized because the system of
Theme/Rheme was determined the most beneficial to analyse the generic structures of the data.
Chapter four will introduce the data and methods. It will discuss the history of the radio address,
including an interesting parallel between Franklin Delano Roosevelt (FDR), the first president to begin
the radio address, and President Barack Obama. It will discuss the specific data (addresses on the
economy, healthcare, man-inflicted tragedies, Christmas) and why this particular set of data was
selected. Further, the methods used for the analysis will be explained. Chapters five to eight will be the
analytical chapters: chapter five will investigate the genre and generic structuring of the 4 addresses on
the economy, chapter six examines the genre and generic structuring of 4 addresses where Obama
discusses problems of the healthcare system in the United States. Chapter seven explores how he
responded to man-inflicted tragedies by examining the genre and generic structuring of those 4
addresses. Finally, chapter eight investigates the genre and generic structuring of the 4 Christmas
13
addresses delivered during his first term. The thesis will then conclude with chapter nine, where it will
discuss the main findings, as well as its relevance. The study will also be evaluated with its implications
and possibilities for further research.
14