The present work shows the results of a corpus-based diachronic study on the language and
the structure of a professional textual genre which has gained growing importance over time in the
field of museum public relations: exhibition press announcements (EPAs).
EPAs are press releases issued by a museum in order to announce an up-coming exhibition
and are meant for a restricted category of journalists, those in charge of arts reporting and criticism.
They belong to the press materials periodically released by a museum, which range from
announcements of seasonal programs – i.e. texts which summarize the main events scheduled in the
year – to single exhibition announcements, devoted to one display in particular; from ordinary news
about the museum, such as announcements of artist talks, presentations of films or books,
accomplishments, awards, new appointments, philanthropic events, to crises responses released in
order to protect the image of the institution.
Contemporary EPAs are generally characterized by short paragraphs and a simple layout
(see Fig. 1.1). They often provide an attention-grabbing image below the headline and include
contact details and background information on the museum.
Despite their undoubted affiliation to the textual genre of press releases, it would be limiting
to present EPAs as a mere subgenre of this category. The high level of creativity characterizing
EPAs, both in terms of lexical choices and structure, their strong promotional intent, often realized
through a massive use of evaluative language and emotional linguistic features, their capacity to
address media people as well as the lay public through their e-dimension (Lazzeretti/Bondi 2012),
encourage readers to consider them as a genre worth of interest per se, sharing its own peculiar
features, as well as its own rules.
EPAs can be comprised under Ravelli’s wide definition of ‘texts in museums’ (2006:2), i.e.
written explanatory texts which function as communication tools between the institutions and their
audiences, and have become crucial especially in consequence of the development of thematic
exhibitions characterized by strong educational goals and aiming to appeal to a wide range of
visitors (McManus 2000, Schiele 1995, Jacobi/Poli 1995): a phenomenon that can be dated back to
the 1940s and is still ongoing. Moreover, they can be considered prime examples of what scholars
have been alternatively calling ‘artwriting’ (Carrier 1987), ‘artspeak’ (Atkins 1990, Harris 2003),
‘art talk’ and ‘artworld discourse’ (Irvine 2004–2009).
EPAs are a little researched topic, yet their evolution over time is a current and high-relevant
issue for museum professionals. There are at least two main aspects related to this genre that still
need to be fully explicated: the first has to do with its evolution – or maybe we should say its
1
survival – in view of the advent of new public relations practices already adopted by museums, such
as social media, community relations and web communication; the second concerns the origin and
reasons of its strong promotional features, which have only been investigated from a synchronic
perspective so far (Lazzeretti 2010; Lazzeretti/Bondi 2012).
Figure 1.1 – Front page of an EPA issued by the J. Paul Getty Museum in 2007
2
With regard to the influence of new technologies and media on EPAs, it has to be pointed
out that over the last few decades, long-established public relations practices, based on traditional
tools, such as press releases and press conferences, have given way to a new paradigm, that places a
higher value on web communication and social media, such as Twitter, Facebook and many others
(Grunig 2009). These new media require also new writing skills and, in particular, a great ability to
synthesize information which challenge the traditional ways of communicating with audiences. As
well known by its users, Twitter allows to send very short messages – no more than 140 characters–
(see Marwick/Boyd 2010); for Facebook there is no strict rule, but conciseness is however
preferable, because users are generally confused and upset by seemingly endless messages (see
Kaplan/Haelein 2010). Moreover, when mobile devices are used and text display is limited to a
smaller screen, synthesis is an inevitable consequence. In contrast, an EPA generally covers at least
two pages or even more and is generally associated with an in-depth presentation of the exhibition.
It is interpreted by practitioners as a textual space where description and evaluation can take place
at ease, a story can be told (for instance, the artist’s biography), and long quotations can be
reported, if needed. So the questions to be addressed are: are EPAs threatened by new forms of
communication? How do they face the adaptive change posed by the Internet and new
technologies? Are they evolving or dissolving?
Scholars have tried to identify the factors involved in genre change, looking at how variables
associated with the various participants and contextual factors interact causing a given genre to
change. As pointed out by Yates and Orlikowski (1992) in their study on genres typical of
organizational communication, such as the memorandum and the proposal, a reciprocal relationship
exists between the changing textual features of a genre and concomitant rules for use that are
determined by people responding to a changing and demographic climate: “empirical research is
needed to investigate the various social, economic, and technological factors that occasion the
production, reproduction, or modification of different genres in different socio-historical contexts”
(1992: 320). For instance, with the appearance of the typewriter, there emerged conventions such as
underlining, subheads, and the use of all capital letters to facilitate readability (Yates/Orlikowski
1992). According to Garzone (2012) the most radical transformations experienced by genres are
indeed those induced by the spread of new technologies, mostly associated with Computer- and
Web-Mediated Communication, which have opened up new, unexpected and virtually boundless
discursive and social spaces, determining profound changes in existing genres as well as the rise of
brand new genres. While for many genres, as for EPAs, a second life has begun on the web, many
new genres have been born that are native to the web, such as emails, blogs, social networks, and
3
have unprecedented peculiarities in terms of mode of discourse (e.g. Askehave/Ellerup Nielsen
2004; Garzone 2007) and unexpected influences upon pre-existing genres. Given this scenario, the
evolution of a genre like EPAs seems particularly worthy of investigation.
As for the second point – promotionality in EPAs –, it has to be noted that much has
changed in the way these texts are received and used by recipients in the last decades. As press
releases in general, EPAs were once sent exclusively to media people – by hand, mail, fax and e-
mail – and did not reach the wider public directly. They were meant as a professional support for
the work of journalists at newspapers, magazines, radio stations, television stations and networks,
who could subsequently decide whether to use them or not in their articles or speeches. Nowadays
press releases – and also EPAs – are placed on websites, with the consequence that journalistic
intervention, also known as “gatekeeping”, can be completely bypassed in reaching audiences.
Addressing directly the general public, which becomes “a ratified participant in the process of press
release fruition” (Catenaccio 2008:15), e-releases can be used by corporations and institutions as
direct marketing tools (see Strobbe/Jacobs 2005, Catenaccio 2008). Online EPAs, for instance, can
become a source of information for tourists planning a visit to the museum, encourage advance
booking, boost e-commerce and merchandising. There is so much potential in spreading online
EPAs that nowadays many companies provide services of direct e-mailing of text and image press
releases to databases of art professionals as well as lay people.1
There is evidence that the e-dimension of press releases has been changing their use and
language, justifying the shift towards a more promotional tone in comparison with traditional paper
press releases (Strobbe / Jacobs 2005). Moreover, the internet has ignited an even stronger
competition among press releases, not only within crowded journalists’ e-mail inboxes, which are
still their most proper destination, but also on the web, where they can be selectively accessed.
This daily struggle for attention, combined with the communicative purposes typical of the
genre – the launch of a new art exhibition and the aim at arousing the interest of potential reviewers
– has influenced EPAs as well, both in terms of lexical choices and textual structure. Reading a
contemporary EPA, one could even gain the impression that journalists – and, indirectly, potential
visitors – are addressed as ‘customers’ to be conquered within a very competitive market. Previous
studies addressing promotional features in EPAs (Lazzeretti 2010; Lazzeretti/Bondi 2012) have
shown an overwhelming use of adjectives, nouns and other linguistic patterns that express positive
1 A significant example of this kind of service in the field of art is the international network e-flux (www.e-flux.com),
which reaches more than 50.000 visual art professionals on a daily basis through its website, e-mail list and special
projects. Its news digest – e-flux announcements – distributes information on contemporary art exhibitions, publications
and symposia all around the world.
4
evaluation of the exhibition, often insisting on concepts of novelty, exclusiveness, uniqueness, and
quality of the featured events; the inclusion of emotionally charged words, that trigger a reaction
from the audience, in order to excite curiosity around the featured artists or their artworks, and
therefore create news value, especially in the headlines of EPAs; the insertion of quotations and
narrative sections aiming at providing journalists with suggestions and stories they can use; the
recurring mention of a catalogue accompanying the exhibition on sale at bookshops. All these
elements can contribute to classify contemporary EPAs among those professional genres that,
according to Bhatia (2004: 90), are “designed to serve informative purposes”, but “invariably focus
on only positive aspects and incorporate persuasive and sometimes even promotional elements”.
Although press releases in general are openly disregarded by journalists, who often
complain that they are badly written or too enthusiastic and self-celebratory, previous studies
carried out in this field show that media people actually depend on the “information subsidies”
provided by press releases (Gandy 1982: 61), as they cannot cover all newsworthy events in person.
This turns out to be true for art journalists who necessarily rely on EPAs when writing about an
exhibition they did not manage to visit. A golden rule is that you cannot review an exhibition before
seeing it with your own eyes; nonetheless, many critics base their journalistic evaluation on press
materials and interviews previously arranged, often as a consequence of their busy agenda or their
physical distance from the exhibiting venue. Promotional language may therefore survive in their
subsequent coverage, generating “free publicity” (Pander Maat 2007: 63). There is also evidence
that “promotional language is dealt with differently in different sectors of the press” and that
“special interest media are apparently quite willing to recycle promotional elements” (Pander Maat
2007: 93). Probably art magazines and newspapers art sections belong to these categories sharing a
more tolerant approach towards promotionally dressed up press releases, but in order to make
claims in this sense a thorough ethnography-based process analysis should be needed. As suggested
by Catenaccio, Cotter, De Smedt et al. (2011: 1848) “detailed empirical evidence for the journalistic
use of source media” – the ‘‘news transmutation process’’ – could be explored with the help of
current technology, “by tracking electronically and/or ethnographically shifts and changes in the
text as it develops (locally and globally) towards its final version for publication or presentation”.
However, once it has been ascertained that promotionality is a main feature of
contemporary EPAs, a question arises: have promotional features characterized EPAs since their
very first origin, or have they been more recently introduced as a consequence of external factors?
Starting from these two main research questions – the evolution of the genre in view of the
advent of new public relations practices and the origin and reasons of its strong promotional
5
features – a diachronic study on EPAs was carried out in order to find out how the genre has
changed over time, what direction it is taking and what professional challenges lie ahead. An ad hoc
corpus was compiled, the EPA Diacorpus, made up of 300 thousand words (tokens) and including
378 EPAs, half issued by American museums and half by British museums, dating from 1950 to
2009, while corpus linguistics and genre-analysis methodologies were used in order to explore its
content.
The diachronic evolution of EPAs can be put in relation to the great social and cultural
changes taking place over the last decades of the past century, and especially with the advent of new
technologies, new public relations practices and transition towards a more market-oriented concept
of museum. Before starting the analysis, the relevant situational context – museums and public
relations – needs therefore to be briefly outlined in the following section (1.1).
6
1683 Oxford Opening of the Ashmolean Museum
1734 Rome Opening of the Capitoline Museum
1759 London Opening of the British Museum
1768 London Establishment of the Royal Academy of Arts
1785 Madrid Opening of the Prado Museum
1793 Paris Opening of the Louvre Museum
1824 London Opening of the National Gallery
1836 Munich Opening of the Alte Pinakothek
1846 Washington Establishment of the Smithsonian Institution
1852 London Opening of the Victoria and Albert Museum
St.
1852 Opening of the Hermitage Museum
Petersburg
1870 New York Opening of the Metropolitan Museum of Art
1879 London Opening of the National Gallery of British Art (Tate Gallery)
1929 New York Opening of the Museum of Modern Art
1931 New York Opening of the Whitney Museum of American Art
1935 New York Opening of the Frick Collection housed in the former Henry Clay Frick House
Opening of the Guggenheim Foundation's first museum, ‘The Museum of Non-Objective
1939 New York
Painting’
1954 Los Angeles Opening of the J. Paul Getty Museum
1959 New York Opening of the Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum designed by Frank Lloyd Wright
1964 Chicago Opening of the Chicago Museum of Contemporary Art
Tab. 1.1 – Timeline of the most important modern museums in Western Europe and in the United States
7
1.1 The situational context: museums and public relations
The development of a textual genre such as EPAs is strictly related to the innovations faced
by museums from the post-war period up to now and to the gradual introduction of public relations
strategies in their management.
After World War II, in Europe particularly, many art treasures which had been removed for
safety reasons had to be recovered and redisplayed; buildings also had to be refurbished. This
reconstruction provided an opportunity for a new approach towards museums, to be seen as
institutions not only serving scholars but a lay public as well (Lewis 2012). Curators in the larger
museums began to work together with a team of scientists, conservators, designers, educators and
even marketing managers to promote the museum and its work.
In the post-war phase, therefore, a new awareness arose regarding the crucial function
played by public relations in contributing to the overall success of the museum, from raising the
media profile, managing their relationships with stakeholders, to attracting new audiences and
regular attendees.
While the first public museums in history were established in Western Europe, as shown by
Tab. 1.1, providing a timeline of the most important modern museums set up from the 17th century
onwards, the origins of museum public relations can be principally traced back to the United States,
which has a tradition in this field. In the United States the birth of modern public relations is
credited to pioneers like Ivy Lee, a former Wall Street reporter, who became a public relations
counsellor for the Pennsylvania Railroad and the Rockefeller family in 1904, and Edward L.
Bernays, who began to work in 1917 for the war’s publicity front and over the years represented
hundreds of clients in all major fields of business. Bernays is also credited with coining the term
“public relations counsel” in his first book on the subject, Crystallizing Public Opinion, originally
published in 1923.
In Europe the growth of public relations became evident in the late 1940s and throughout the
1950s and 1960s, especially in the United Kingdom, where local governmental authorities were
giving serious consideration to public communications. It was local government officials who were
most responsible for founding the Institute of Public Relations (IPR) in the UK in 1948, the first
organization of professional practitioners.
8
Although relatively little research addresses the field of museum public relations and more
in instructional, rather than theoretical terms (see however Adams 1983, McLean 1997, Schoen
2005, Kotler et al. 2008, Gürel / Kavak 2010), we may assume that the development of a public
relations segment specifically meant for museums started in the US and subsequently spread in
Western Europe. As pointed out by McLean (2012: 42), “marketing was introduced to American
museums at roughly the same period as to UK museums […]. Nevertheless American museums
have led the field in adopting marketing techniques and innovating with marketing practice”. At an
earlier stage, the adoption of public relations practices brought about some concern among museum
administrators, who feared that these may compromise a museum’s authentic mission: according to
Finn (1984:59), the first time public relations specialists worked with museums was on “major
exhibitions – particularly those sponsored by corporations that hope[d] to achieve public relations
benefits” (1984:59). At the time, such commercial aspects sounded ill suited to museums strictly
committed to cultural and educational aims. However, Finn (1984) states that major exhibitions
appeal to the media (and also sponsors) independently from public relations and simply because
they are interesting and newsworthy.
Bearing in mind that public relations have become an integral part of museum operations
and press officers play a very important part in the public relations work conducted by museums
(Kotler et al. 2008), further evidence of the anticipating role played by American museums in this
field may be obtained from exploring the EPA Diacorpus, compiled for the present study. The
collected documents, dating back to the 1950s onwards and issued by nine different American and
British museums, show that in American museums professional press officers were already
employed and mentioned by their names on EPAs since the 1950s, while in British museums
personal press contact is not provided before the end of the 1960s. At the New York Museum of
Modern Arts, for instance, Elizabeth Shaw appears as “publicity director” since 1955; at the
Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum, a public relations consultant, Peter Pollack, is mentioned with
regularity from 1961 onwards. Conversely, EPAs belonging to the London Victoria and Albert
Museum report on the headlines that they are issued by a “Department of Public Relations” only
from 1968 onwards; at the London National Gallery the name of a press officer, Phyllis Rowlands,
is mentioned on EPAs from 1975 onwards, while at the London Royal Academy a curator was
dealing with the press in the early 1970s, Nicholas Usherwood, and a professional press officer –
Griselda Hamilton Baillie – was appointed only afterwards.
The 1950s were also crucial for the development of the textual genre of EPAs in
consideration of the “growing specialization in professional profiles” employed in the media
(Facchinetti et al. 2012: 103). From the half of the century “more and more domains were covered
9
by experts in their fields” (ibi. 103). Thus editors began, for instance, to hire an art expert, so as a
fashion expert or a royal correspondent, in coincidence with the expansion of special sections in the
newspapers. In this period EPAs were delivered by post or even by hand. In absence of a
professional in charge of public relations, museum directors were used to writing EPAs.
After World War II museums became an educational facility, a source of leisure activity,
and a medium of communication. As a result, they also found a new popularity and attracted an
increasing number of visitors. Statistics give an indication of the increase in the number of
museums and in museum visiting. In the United States, of 8,200 museums reported for 1988, 75
percent had been founded since 1950 and 40 percent since 1970. In the 1970s nearly 350 million
visits per year were made to American museums; in 1988 the recorded figure was 566 million. One
of the oldest established museums in Europe – the British Museum – regularly attracted more than 3
million visits a year (Lewis 2012).
Despite governments, particularly in Europe, acknowledged their contribution to museums,
these have been much influenced by changing policies in public sector finance. In the second half of
twentieth century the contribution of public funds to museums has remained static or has fallen, so
that museums’ governing bodies and directors have had to seek funding from alternative sources.
The need for marketing and fund-raising expertise, therefore, has been increasingly accentuated and
the organization of “blockbuster exhibitions” has become central for the financial support art
museums (Alexander and Alexander 2008). These events are not only capable of attracting visitors
and increasing admission income and museum shop sales, but they also allow for cross marketing to
increase tourism citywide. For instance, the 1996 Cezanne retrospective exhibition at the
Philadelphia Museum of Art attracted more than half a million people in three months (Alexander
and Alexander 2008: 44).
Another reflection of the changed financial situation has been the introduction of admission
charges. According to Lewis (2012) in 1984 none of the British national museums charged an entry
fee, while ten years later almost half were doing so. The number of American museums charging
fees for admission increased over a similar period from 32 percent to 55 percent. As pointed out by
McFelter (2007), in August 2006, the Metropolitan Museum of Art in New York created a case
when it announced a 33 percent increase — from $15 to $20 per adult visitor — to bring the Met’s
recommended entry fee in line with those at other New York museums, most notably the Museum
of Modern Art’s $20 charge.
The opportunity of charging admission is under debate not only in the United States, but
also in Britain, where free museums are a great tradition. On one hand, museum theorists argue that
10
admission fees may be the single biggest obstacle preventing museums from fulfilling their
missions as educational institutions:
“If they remain oriented toward their paying customers, museums will never become the
town square that we are so fond of talking about. Drop the charges. I have reluctantly
but unequivocally come to the conclusion that general admission charges are the single
greatest impediment to making our museums truly and fully accessible”
(Heumann Gurian 2006).
On the other hand, an influential British art journalist, Jonathan Jones, recently wrote on the
Guardian website : “charging for entry cannot be a taboo. […] Charging for entry is a better remedy
than selling paintings, closing galleries or sacking staff. Might it even give visitors a keener sense of
the value of some of the greatest experiences it is possible to have?”2.
With increasing economic importance and shrinking sources of income, public relations has
grown in importance for museums. According to McLean (2012), “the most significant threats to
museums come from central and local government” (221). Museums are becoming more dependent
on wealthy benefactors and public subsidy to generate income since the current political climate
lacks long-term vision and policy cohesion. In this time of “financial stringency,” governments also
take a lead role in encouraging museums to market themselves (McLean 2012: 37).
In such a context, EPAs have a great potential, as they build relationships first with the
media and, consequently, with the public, who can become “more involved in the choice and
interpretation of exhibit topics” (Karp et al. 1992: 182).
The use of new technologies by museums took off during the 1990s and grew rapidly during
that decade. The fax, primarily used in the 1980s by businesses and government agencies, in the
1990s became more common among the general public and museums as well. During the 1980s and
the 1990s EPAs were mostly sent to the media via fax. A few years later the Internet made its
breakthrough, and museums began e-mailing and sending documents and scanned images. The
development of websites gave rise to the terms ‘museum without walls’, ‘post-museum’ and ‘virtual
museum’ (Hooper-Greenhill 2000: 152–153). New technologies allowed museums to present more
fluid and wide-ranging communications focused on particular events and conversations. On the
2 http://www.guardian.co.uk/artanddesign/jonathanjonesblog/2011/jul/21/museums-charging-admission-entry-fees.
11
web these include online access to collections and databases; online exhibitions (text, image,
audiovisual); virtual exhibitions (including 360-degree room views); virtual museums, the use of
real and imaginary exhibition and gallery spaces; downloadable and streamed multimedia content
(audio, video, podcasts); interactive gallery maps; dedicated sites, games and play spaces for
children and young people; personalized spaces – creating own favourites and tagging objects; use
of social media (blogs, Facebook, Twitter, Flickr, YouTube), and shopping online (exhibition
tickets, merchandise). Virtual press rooms have also been created, allowing art journalists to access
on line press materials selectively – and EPAs among them –, wherever and whenever they need
them, without even calling the press officer. Although placed in specific press areas within
museum websites and therefore apparently still reserved to a well defined professional category –
journalists – EPAs have been turned into public documents and internet has rapidly changed their
use and language.
Indeed, over the last few decades, conventional public relations strategies, based on mere
press coverage, have been challenged by social media, community relations, and corporate relations
(Grunig, 2009). Nevertheless, media outreach remains a basic component of any museum public
relations strategy (Kotler et al. 2008; Rentschler/Hede, 2007). Media releases, sometimes sent many
months in advance, and media previews are still perceived by museums as useful tools for
influencing the media’s opinion about their exhibitions (Genoways/Ireland, 2003), but also for
driving public opinion and, hopefully, attendance.
1.2 Research directions
The present study is based on a diachronic corpus comprised of 378 EPAs, half issued by
American museums and half by British museums. The collected EPAs are evenly distributed across
six decades: 1950, 1960, 1970, 1980, 1990, 2000. The corpus has been explored in quantitative and
qualitative terms following corpus linguistics and genre-analysis methodologies.
The enquiry addresses the following research questions:
- How has the genre changed in order to face the challenge posed by new
technologies and by Internet in particular?
- Are EPAs threatened by new approaches used in contemporary public
relations, such as social media networks? Are they going to be replaced or will be able to
survive?
12
- Have promotional features characterized the genre of EPAs since its earlier
expressions or have they been more recently introduced as a consequence of external
factors, such as new technologies, development of marketing, economical variables,
globalization?
- What lexical variation can be identified in EPAs from the 1950s up to now?
- Is it possible to identify patterns of sharp growth, decline or stability in the
frequencies of lexical items across the decades?
- Has there been any lexical change reflecting socio-cultural change, for
instance in the way exhibitions are organized, artists and subjects are selected?
- What structural variation can be identified in EPAs from the 1950s up to
now?
- As the corpus is divided into two equal sub-sections, American and British, is
it possible to highlight differences between the two in terms of diachronic variation?
1.3 Outline of contents
With regard to the organization of the thesis, the first part prepares the groundwork for the
study, while the second goes deeper into the analysis. Since the methods applied in the study
combine genre analysis and corpus linguistics, chapter 2–4 aim at introducing both methodologies
extensively. Chapter 2 provides general information on genre theory, the development of written
discourse analysis, the different approaches to genre and recent developments in this field. Chapter
3 and 4 discuss the development of corpus linguistics methodologies, with special attention to
diachronic studies. The relevant domains of EPAs, to be associated with professional discourse and
in particular with media and art discourses, are presented in chapter 5. The design of the corpus, as
well as the methods applied in the analysis, are presented in chapter 6 and 7. In chapters 8 and 9 the
main analysis is carried out: the EPA Diacorpus is explored with regard to lexical and structural
variation respectively. Conclusions are eventually drawn in chapter 10.
13