This thesis aims to expand understanding of how language varies according to context by investigating
the written-to-be-spoken language of political discourse (Wilson 1990; Chilton and Schaffner 2002;
Wodak and Chilton 2005; Fairclough 2003; van Dijk 2008; Cap et al 2013). Specifically, the study
demonstrates the existence of sub-genres in varying contexts of situation within the genre of political
discourse by investigating the generic structure of political speeches of similar registers, thus a
‘repertoire of registers’ (Bakhtin 1986; Martin 1992). This study views genre as being sociocultural with
specific goals in mind. It is sociocultural because it usually involves other people with the same cultural
‘norms’ and it has specific goals in mind to accomplish which require different stages to go through in
order to reach the specific goal (Martin & Rose 2007: 8). Therefore, to reveal the genre, it examines the
generic structure (Christie and Martin 1997; Martin and Rose 2007; Coffin et al 2009) of similar
registers. To reveal the generic structure, the study proposes Theme/Rheme, part of the textual
metafunction of systemic functional linguistics (SFL) (Halliday 1994; Halliday and Matthiessen 2004;
Eggins 2004; Thompson 2004), as a means of identifying generic moves within text.
Since there seems to be a gap of linguistic research within the genre of the American Presidential radio
address, this thesis linguistically investigated the radio addresses of Barack Obama during his first term
as President, 2009-2012. It focused on four diverse ‘repertoires of registers’, with each repertoire
comprising of four radio address topics: (1) the economy, (2) healthcare, (3) man-inflicted tragedy and
(4) Christmas. Each address within each repertoire was analysed for Theme/Rheme to determine its
generic structure and then was compared and contrasted to the other addresses within that topic to
investigate the hypothesis that they are similar in generic structure, thus a potential sub-genre. Further,
to highlight the possible sub-genre of one repertoire of registers, the generic structures of each
repertoire of registers were then contrasted with the other repertoires to reveal how they unfold
differently when compared to the others. Overall, the study, first, contributed linguistic analysis to the
genre of the radio address. Secondly, it demonstrated that Theme/Rheme is an effective tool for
revealing generic structure. Thirdly, the findings showed that each repertoire of topics were similar in
the following ways: the generic structure, the common thread found in the motif, and the types of theme
that indicated a generic move. This concluded that they then may be seen as a sub-genre within an
already established genre of the radio address. The benefits from the analysis showed that language
does function and unfold within specific contexts in which it is constructed and produced, and therefore,
the research stresses the importance of context of situation when analysing text.
i
ii