Cecilia Lazzeretti
Università degli Studi di Modena e Reggio Emilia
SCUOLA DI DOTTORATO IN SCIENZE UMANISTICHE
XXVI CICLO
DIACHRONIC EVOLUTION
OF EXHIBITION PRESS ANNOUNCEMENTS
Relatore:
Marina Bondi
Direttore della scuola:
Stefano Calabrese
ii
Acknowledgements
My gratitude is due first of all to my supervisor, Prof. Marina Bondi, Dean of the Faculty of
Humanities at University of Modena and Reggio Emilia, for guidance during the doctoral stage of
the research. Her advice was of invaluable help and without her guidance it would have been
impossible to complete this study.
I am also thankful to Prof. Geert Jacobs (Ghent University) for inspiring me with his
influential work and encouraging me through his words.
Among those who variously contributed to this study, I am indebted to Prof. Marc Silver
(University of Modena), Prof. Maria Freddi (University of Pavia), to my colleagues Dr. Anna
Stermieri and Dr. Annalisa Sezzi (University of Modena), and to the anonymous referees who
reviewed the articles extracted from this thesis for their constructive comments.
A word of thanks goes to librarians, archivists and press officers, who provided materials
collected in the corpus and feedback: Nicholas Donaldson, Assistant Archivist at the London
National Gallery; Mark Pomeroy, Librarian at the London Royal Academy of Arts; James Sutton,
Archivist at the London Victoria&Albert Museum; Mary Richardson and Janice Dillard, Librarians
at the Chicago Museum of Contemporary Art; Francine Snyder, Director of Library and Archives at
the Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum; Heidi Rosenau, Manager of Media Relations and Marketing at
the New York Frick Collection, and Flavia Fossa Margutti, Head of Media Relations at the Rovereto
Mart Museum (Trento, Italy).
Finally, on a more personal level, I am grateful to my husband and my family, who, with
their continuous and patient support, have made possible this work, and to my beloved daughter
Nora, reason of all reasons.
iii
iv
Contents
Abstract (in English) ix
Abstract (in Italian) xi
Key to abbreviations xiii
List of figures xv
List of tables xvii
1 Introduction 1
1.1 The situational context: museums and public relations 8
1.2 Research directions 12
1.3 Outline of contents 13
2 Theoretical background: genre analysis 14
2.1 Historical development of written discourse analysis 14
2.1.1 First phase: textualisation of lexico-grammar 14
2.1.2 Second phase: organisation of discourse 16
2.1.3 Third phase: contextualisation of discourse 20
2.2 Approaches to genre analysis 23
2.2.1 The systemic functional approach 24
2.2.2 The new rhetoric approach 25
2.2.3 The ESP approach 27
2.3 Summary 30
3 Theoretical background: corpus studies 31
3.1 Research on corpora: origin and issues 31
3.2 Corpus-based vs. corpus-driven approaches 36
3.2 General corpora vs. specialised corpora 37
3.3 Exploiting corpora 41
3.4. Summary 42
4 Theoretical background: diachronic studies 43
4.1 Modern diachronic linguistics 43
4.2 Compiling a diachronic corpus 45
v
4.3 Approaches to diachronic change 46
4.3.1 Lexical variation 47
4.3.2 Structural variation 48
4.4 Diachronic studies applied to specialized discourse 50
4.5 Summary 53
5 Relevant domains: media, promotional and art discourse 54
5.1 Media discourse 55
5.1.1 Press releases 56
5.1.2 Narrative in press releases 59
5.2 Promotional discourse 61
5.3 Art discourse 66
5.4 Summary 70
6 Materials 71
7 Methods 76
7.1 Preliminary analysis 77
7.1.1 EPA Diacorpus: general statistics 77
7.1.2 Pilot study 80
7.2 Analysis of diachronic lexical variation 86
7.3 Analysis of diachronic structural variation 92
7.4 Summary 95
8 Diachronic lexical variation: growth, decline and stability 96
8.1 Auxiliary verbs 98
8.1.1 had 98
8.1.2 are 100
8.1.3 be 101
8.2 Lexical verbs 102
8.2.1 contact 102
8.2.2 represented, acquired, exhibited 103
8.2.3 shown, shows 109
8.2.4 seen, held, selected 111
vi
8.2.5 made 113
8.3 Lexical nouns (abstract) 115
8.3.1 career 115
8.3.2 photography, architecture, media 117
8.3.3 examples, form 121
8.3.4 education 127
8.4 Lexical Nouns (concrete) 127
8.4.1 office, department 127
8.4.2 admission, tickets, students 126
8.4.3 events, education 129
8.4.4 country, tour 131
8.4.5 catalogue 133
8.4.6 release 135
8.4.7 picture, images 137
8.4.8 man 140
8.4.9 painters 141
8.4.10 landscape 142
8.4.11 drawings, paintings 144
8.4.12 curator, director 146
8.5 Adjectives 149
8.5.1 visual 149
8.5.2 first 151
8.5.3 great, famous, known 152
8.6 Adverbials and pro-forms 152
8.6.1 here 152
8.6.2 there 154
8.6.3 so 157
8.6.4 still 158
8.7 Prepositions 160
8.7.1 until, among 161
8.7.2 since 163
8.8 Determiners 165
8.9 Question words 167
8.10 Acronyms 168
vii
8.11 Terms of address 170
8.12 Interjections 172
8.13 Discussion and concluding remarks 173
9 Diachronic structural variation 179
9.1 The evolution from a basic to a more complex model 179
9.2 Structure of EPAs in 1950 184
9.3 Structure of EPAs in 1960 189
9.4 Structure of EPAs in 1970 194
9.5 Structure of EPAs in 1980 199
9.6 Structure of EPAs in 1990 203
9.7 Structure of EPAs in 2000 208
9.8 The use of quotations across decades 211
9.9 The use of narrative sections across decades 215
9.10 Discussion and concluding remarks 218
10 Conclusions 222
10.1 Synthesis of results of lexical analysis 222
10.2 Synthesis of results of structural analysis 225
10.3 Differences between the American and British sub-corpora 228
10.4 Final considerations 230
References 233
Appendix – EPA Diacorpus: list of EPAS 247
viii
Abstract (in English)
The dissertation focuses on diachronic variation in a professional genre which has gained
growing importance over time in the field of museum public relations: exhibition press
announcements (EPAs). Keeping a middle ground between media and art discourse, EPAs are
written for journalists in charge of reviews, although, once they are published on museum websites,
they are also able to reach general audience.
For the purposes of this research a new corpus was compiled, the EPA Diacorpus, made up
of 300 thousand words (tokens) and comprising 378 EPAs dating from 1950 to 2009, half issued by
American and half by British museums.
The data processing consisted of different stages, from computer-based to manual analysis
of the texts. In order to become acquainted with the data and aware of the types of research
questions that could prove worthy of investigation, a preliminary analysis was carried out. In view
of the related findings, it was stipulated to concentrate the exploration of the EPA Diacorpus on two
main linguistic aspects: diachronic lexical variation and diachronic structural variation.
The lexical analysis allowed to report a number of lexical trends reflective of changes in the
way exhibitions are organized and artists are selected. A significant phenomenon is the shift from
one-item to multi-item exhibitions: the decline of the word picture in its singular form, rather than
in its plural, typically pre-modified by a determiner (the, this), in parallel to the increase of other
plural nouns identifying art works to put on display (images, works, objects) leads us to that
conclusion. Moreover, something has changed in the way artists are selected for exhibitions: they
do not have to be famous – another declining word –, nor great or known, since the latter adjectives
preferably refer to their work, but they definitely must have an acknowledged career, a noun
showing a clear pattern of growth across decades. Young artists, conversely, have fewer advantages
in the art scene, as reflected by the lexical choice of EPAs, where less than 30 occurrences can be
ascribed to the semantic field of youth. Art subjects may change, and portraits – an increasing item
– may be more intriguing for our times, but a landscape is still a must for any exhibition, as well as
drawings and paintings, to mention some lockwords of the corpus. The analysis also highlighted a
preference for more vivid descriptions, not filtered by distancing verbs: the decline of the forms
shown and shows can be interpreted in these terms.
Coming to the structure analysis, while contemporary EPAs show a more consistent scheme,
the one provided by earlier texts is varied. Yet a prototypical structure comprised of three main
moves may be already highlighted in the 1950s: a brief announcement of the exhibition, an
ix
explanatory section on the topic, and some pieces of information specific for the press members,
soliciting their response, although in a very implicit way. Starting from the 1980s two promotional
moves have been highlighted: one establishing credentials for the exhibition by stating its credits,
such as organization, curatorship and sponsorship, and one providing technical information for
visitors (opening hours, free or charged admission, how to buy tickets, collateral events, etc...).
x
Abstract (in Italian)
La tesi è incentrata sulla variazione diacronica di un genere professionale che ha acquisito
crescente importanza nelle pubbliche relazioni museali, i comunicati stampa di mostra. A metà
strada fra discorso giornalistico e artistico, questi comunicati sono indirizzati alla stampa
specializzata, ma una volta pubblicati sul sito web di un museo possono raggiungere anche i non
addetti ai lavori.
Per lo scopo di questa ricerca è stato costituito un corpus di 300 mila parole - EPA
Diacorpus - che comprende 378 comunicati stampa pubblicati dal 1950 al 2009 da musei inglesi e
americani.
L’analisi ha affiancato metodologie quantitative e qualitative. In prima battuta, per prendere
coscienza dei dati e delle potenzialità insite nella ricerca è stata svolta un’analisi preliminare del
corpus, in base alla quale si è deciso successivamente di concentrarsi su due aspetti linguistici: la
variazione lessicale e la variazione strutturale.
L’analisi della variazione lessicale ha permesso di riconoscere tendenze che riflettono
anche cambiamenti di ordine culturale, per esempio nel modo in cui si allestiscono le mostre e si
scelgono gli artisti. Un fenomeno significativo è il passaggio da allestimenti incentrati su una sola
opera alle grandi mostre: il declino del sostantivo picture nella forma al singolare, tipicamente
preceduto da determinativi (the, this), e non al plurale, che invece è in crescita così come altri
sostantivi riferiti a oggetti in mostra (images, works, objects), porta in questa direzione. Inoltre,
qualcosa è cambiato nella selezione degli artisti: non devono essere famosi (famous è un aggettivo
in calo nel corpus), né grandi o conosciuti (great e known sono stabili ma riferiti piuttosto alle
opere), ma devono avere una carriera accertata, come mostra il profilo in crescita del sostantivo
career. Di contro, gli artisti giovani hanno minori chance di affermarsi: le espressioni riconducibili
alla categoria semantica della giovinezza sono meno di 30 in tutto il corpus. I soggetti in mostra
possono cambiare e i ritratti hanno guadagnato maggior consenso (portraits è in crescita), ma un
panorama è un classico per qualsiasi allestimento, così come disegni e dipinti, per citare alcune
parole costanti del corpus (landscape, drawings, paintings). L’analisi ha anche evidenziato una
graduale preferenza per descrizioni dirette, senza la mediazione di verbi distanziatori, così come
lascia interpretare il declino di shown e shows.
Venendo all’analisi strutturale è possibile notare come i comunicati stampa più recenti
abbiano una struttura più definita e ricorrente rispetto a quelli degli anni cinquanta e sessanta. È
comunque possibile riconoscere sin dagli albori del genere una struttura prototipica in tre mosse: un
breve annuncio della mostra, un corpo centrale di spiegazione dei contenuti e un appendice finale
xi
con informazioni per i giornalisti, mirate a sollecitarne il riscontro, sia pure in forma implicita. A
partire dagli anni ottanta lo schema si arrichisce di due mosse promozionali: una mirata a segnalare
le credenziali della mostra (organizzazione, curatela, sponsor) e una mirata a fornire informazioni
tecniche per i visitatori (orari di apertura, modalità di ingresso – libero o a pagamento -, eventi
collaterali, etc.).
xii
Key to Abbreviations
ANC American National Corpus
BE06 British English 2006
BNC British National Corpus
BROWN Brown University Standard Corpus of present-Day American English
CADS Corpus-Assisted Discourse Studies
CARS Creating a Research Space
CCL Computer Corpus Linguistics
COBUILD Collins Birmingham University International Language Database
COCA Corpus of Contemporary American English
COHA Corpus of Historical American English
CV Coefficient of Variance
FLOB Freiburg-LOB Corpus of British English
FROWN Freiburg-Brown Corpus
GSP Generic Structure Potential
GL General Language
EPA Exhibition Press Announcements
ESP English for Specific Purposes
EST English for Science and Technology
HCME Hypermedia Computer-Mediated Environment
IAE International Art English
IAL International Art Language
IPR Institute of Public Relations
LOB Lancaster-Oslo/Bergen Corpus of British English
LSP Language for Special/Specific Purposes
NR New Rhetoric
RA Research Article
RCV1 Reuters Corpus, Volume 1
RNC-1 Rostock Historical Newspaper Corpus
SS Schematic Structure
SFL Systemic Functional Linguistics
STTR Standardized Type/Token Ratio
TIME Time Magazine Corpus
xiii
TTR Type/Token Ratio
UPC Uppsala Press Corpus
ZEN Zurich English Newspaper Corpus
xiv
List of figures
Figure 1.1 – Front page of an EPA issued by the J. Paul Getty Museum in 2007
Figure 2.1 – A multi-perspective four-space model of discourse analysis (Bhatia 2004: 19)
Figure 3.1 – Stages in English language corpus evolution (Renouf 2007a)
Figure 5.1 – Collocation of EPAs among relevant discourse domains and related genres
Figure 5.2 – Colonization of academic, professional and other institutionalized genres (Bhatia 2004:
90)
Figure 6.1 – Front page of an EPA issued by the Victoria & Albert Museum in 1952
Figure 8.1 – Frequencies of had
Figure 8.2 – Frequencies of are
Figure 8.3 – Frequencies of be
Figure 8.4 – Frequencies of contact, please
Figure 8.5 – Frequencies of represented, acquired, exhibited
Figure 8.6 – Frequencies of shown, shows
Figure 8.7 – Frequencies of seen, held, selected
Figure 8.8 – Frequencies of made
Figure 8.9 – Frequencies of career
Figure 8.10 – Frequencies of photography, architecture
Figure 8.11 – Frequencies of media
Figure 8.12 – Frequencies of examples
Figure 8.13 – Frequencies of form
Figure 8.14 – Frequencies of office, department
Figure 8.15 – Frequencies of admission, tickets
Figure 8.16 – Frequencies of students
Figure 8.17 – Frequencies of education, events
Figure 8.18 – Frequencies of tour, country
Figure 8.19 – Frequencies of catalogue
Figure 8.20 – Frequencies of release
Figure 8.21 – Frequencies of picture
Figure 8.22 – Frequencies of man
Figure 8.23 – Frequencies of painters
Figure 8.24 – Frequencies of landscape
Figure 8.25 – Frequencies of drawings, paintings
xv
Figure 8.26 – Frequencies of curator, director
Figure 8.27 – Frequencies of visual
Figure 8.28 – Frequencies of first
Figure 8.30 – frequency of there
Figure 8.31 – Frequencies of so
Figure 8.32 – Frequencies of still
Figure 8.33 – Frequencies of until and among
Figure 8.34 – Frequency of since
Figure 8.35 – Frequencies of some
Figure 8.36 – Frequencies of which
Figure 8.37 – Frequencies of www, org, uk, and tel
Figure 8.38 – Frequencies of mrs and mr
xvi
List of tables
Tab. 1.1 – Timeline of the most important modern museums in Western Europe and in the US
Tab. 3.1 – Major British and American general corpora (from 1961 onwards)
Tab. 3.2 - Major British and American corpora specialized in media discourse
Tab. 6.1 – Main features of the EPA Diacorpus
Tab. 6.2 – EPA Diacorpus: sources, number, and original format of EPAs
Tab. 6.3 - EPA Diacorpus: number of EPAs across decades and countries
Tab. 7.1 – EPA Diacorpus: general statistics (1)
Tab. 7.2 – EPA Diacorpus: general statistics (2)
Tab. 7.3 – Pilot study: top 10 lemmas
Tab. 7.4 – Pilot study: top 10 lexical words
Tab. 7.5 – Pilot study: top 40 collocates of exhibition in 1950 EPAs
Tab. 7.6 – Pilot study: top 40 collocates of exhibition in 2000 EPAs
Tab. 7.7 – Pilot study: top 100 keywords of 2000 EPAs v. 1950 EPAs
Tab. 7.8 – Pilot study: identified structure of EPAs in the 1950s
Tab. 7.9 - Pilot study: identified structure of EPAs in the 2000s
Tab. 7.10 – EPA Diacorpus: words showing the strongest frequency increases
Tab. 7.11 – EPA Diacorpus: words showing the strongest frequency decreases
Tab. 7.12 – EPA Diacorpus: words showing less variation in their frequencies
Tab. 8.1 – Summary of main findings across the EPA Diacorpus
Tab. 9.1 – Prototypical structure of EPAs (1950): three main moves
Tab. 9.2 – Ultimate structure of EPAs (2000): five main moves
Tab. 9.3 – Ultimate complete macrostructure of contemporary EPAs: moves and steps
Tab. 9.4 – Macrostructure of EPAs in the 1950s
Tab. 9.5 – Macrostructure of EPAs in the 1960s
Tab. 9.6 – Macrostructure of EPAs in the 1970s
Tab. 9.7 – Macrostructure of EPAs in the 1980s
Tab. 9.8 – Macrostructure of EPAs in the 1990s
Tab. 9.9 – Macrostructure of EPAs in the 2000s
Tab. 9.10 – Number of EPAs containing quotations across decades and countries
Tab. 9.11 – Number of quotations distinguished by authors
Tab. 9.12 – Number of EPAs containing narrative sections across decades and countries
Tab. 9.13 – Relevant context of narrative sections across decades
xvii
Tab. 9.14 – Evolution of moves across decades according to their frequency
xviii
1. Introduction
The present work shows the results of a corpus-based diachronic study on the language and
the structure of a professional textual genre which has gained growing importance over time in the
field of museum public relations: exhibition press announcements (EPAs).
EPAs are press releases issued by a museum in order to announce an up-coming exhibition
and are meant for a restricted category of journalists, those in charge of arts reporting and criticism.
They belong to the press materials periodically released by a museum, which range from
announcements of seasonal programs – i.e. texts which summarize the main events scheduled in the
year – to single exhibition announcements, devoted to one display in particular; from ordinary news
about the museum, such as announcements of artist talks, presentations of films or books,
accomplishments, awards, new appointments, philanthropic events, to crises responses released in
order to protect the image of the institution.
Contemporary EPAs are generally characterized by short paragraphs and a simple layout
(see Fig. 1.1). They often provide an attention-grabbing image below the headline and include
contact details and background information on the museum.
Despite their undoubted affiliation to the textual genre of press releases, it would be limiting
to present EPAs as a mere subgenre of this category. The high level of creativity characterizing
EPAs, both in terms of lexical choices and structure, their strong promotional intent, often realized
through a massive use of evaluative language and emotional linguistic features, their capacity to
address media people as well as the lay public through their e-dimension (Lazzeretti/Bondi 2012),
encourage readers to consider them as a genre worth of interest per se, sharing its own peculiar
features, as well as its own rules.
EPAs can be comprised under Ravelli’s wide definition of ‘texts in museums’ (2006:2), i.e.
written explanatory texts which function as communication tools between the institutions and their
audiences, and have become crucial especially in consequence of the development of thematic
exhibitions characterized by strong educational goals and aiming to appeal to a wide range of
visitors (McManus 2000, Schiele 1995, Jacobi/Poli 1995): a phenomenon that can be dated back to
the 1940s and is still ongoing. Moreover, they can be considered prime examples of what scholars
have been alternatively calling ‘artwriting’ (Carrier 1987), ‘artspeak’ (Atkins 1990, Harris 2003),
‘art talk’ and ‘artworld discourse’ (Irvine 2004–2009).
EPAs are a little researched topic, yet their evolution over time is a current and high-relevant
issue for museum professionals. There are at least two main aspects related to this genre that still
need to be fully explicated: the first has to do with its evolution – or maybe we should say its
1
survival – in view of the advent of new public relations practices already adopted by museums, such
as social media, community relations and web communication; the second concerns the origin and
reasons of its strong promotional features, which have only been investigated from a synchronic
perspective so far (Lazzeretti 2010; Lazzeretti/Bondi 2012).
Figure 1.1 – Front page of an EPA issued by the J. Paul Getty Museum in 2007
2
With regard to the influence of new technologies and media on EPAs, it has to be pointed
out that over the last few decades, long-established public relations practices, based on traditional
tools, such as press releases and press conferences, have given way to a new paradigm, that places a
higher value on web communication and social media, such as Twitter, Facebook and many others
(Grunig 2009). These new media require also new writing skills and, in particular, a great ability to
synthesize information which challenge the traditional ways of communicating with audiences. As
well known by its users, Twitter allows to send very short messages – no more than 140 characters–
(see Marwick/Boyd 2010); for Facebook there is no strict rule, but conciseness is however
preferable, because users are generally confused and upset by seemingly endless messages (see
Kaplan/Haelein 2010). Moreover, when mobile devices are used and text display is limited to a
smaller screen, synthesis is an inevitable consequence. In contrast, an EPA generally covers at least
two pages or even more and is generally associated with an in-depth presentation of the exhibition.
It is interpreted by practitioners as a textual space where description and evaluation can take place
at ease, a story can be told (for instance, the artist’s biography), and long quotations can be
reported, if needed. So the questions to be addressed are: are EPAs threatened by new forms of
communication? How do they face the adaptive change posed by the Internet and new
technologies? Are they evolving or dissolving?
Scholars have tried to identify the factors involved in genre change, looking at how variables
associated with the various participants and contextual factors interact causing a given genre to
change. As pointed out by Yates and Orlikowski (1992) in their study on genres typical of
organizational communication, such as the memorandum and the proposal, a reciprocal relationship
exists between the changing textual features of a genre and concomitant rules for use that are
determined by people responding to a changing and demographic climate: “empirical research is
needed to investigate the various social, economic, and technological factors that occasion the
production, reproduction, or modification of different genres in different socio-historical contexts”
(1992: 320). For instance, with the appearance of the typewriter, there emerged conventions such as
underlining, subheads, and the use of all capital letters to facilitate readability (Yates/Orlikowski
1992). According to Garzone (2012) the most radical transformations experienced by genres are
indeed those induced by the spread of new technologies, mostly associated with Computer- and
Web-Mediated Communication, which have opened up new, unexpected and virtually boundless
discursive and social spaces, determining profound changes in existing genres as well as the rise of
brand new genres. While for many genres, as for EPAs, a second life has begun on the web, many
new genres have been born that are native to the web, such as emails, blogs, social networks, and
3
have unprecedented peculiarities in terms of mode of discourse (e.g. Askehave/Ellerup Nielsen
2004; Garzone 2007) and unexpected influences upon pre-existing genres. Given this scenario, the
evolution of a genre like EPAs seems particularly worthy of investigation.
As for the second point – promotionality in EPAs –, it has to be noted that much has
changed in the way these texts are received and used by recipients in the last decades. As press
releases in general, EPAs were once sent exclusively to media people – by hand, mail, fax and e-
mail – and did not reach the wider public directly. They were meant as a professional support for
the work of journalists at newspapers, magazines, radio stations, television stations and networks,
who could subsequently decide whether to use them or not in their articles or speeches. Nowadays
press releases – and also EPAs – are placed on websites, with the consequence that journalistic
intervention, also known as “gatekeeping”, can be completely bypassed in reaching audiences.
Addressing directly the general public, which becomes “a ratified participant in the process of press
release fruition” (Catenaccio 2008:15), e-releases can be used by corporations and institutions as
direct marketing tools (see Strobbe/Jacobs 2005, Catenaccio 2008). Online EPAs, for instance, can
become a source of information for tourists planning a visit to the museum, encourage advance
booking, boost e-commerce and merchandising. There is so much potential in spreading online
EPAs that nowadays many companies provide services of direct e-mailing of text and image press
releases to databases of art professionals as well as lay people.1
There is evidence that the e-dimension of press releases has been changing their use and
language, justifying the shift towards a more promotional tone in comparison with traditional paper
press releases (Strobbe / Jacobs 2005). Moreover, the internet has ignited an even stronger
competition among press releases, not only within crowded journalists’ e-mail inboxes, which are
still their most proper destination, but also on the web, where they can be selectively accessed.
This daily struggle for attention, combined with the communicative purposes typical of the
genre – the launch of a new art exhibition and the aim at arousing the interest of potential reviewers
– has influenced EPAs as well, both in terms of lexical choices and textual structure. Reading a
contemporary EPA, one could even gain the impression that journalists – and, indirectly, potential
visitors – are addressed as ‘customers’ to be conquered within a very competitive market. Previous
studies addressing promotional features in EPAs (Lazzeretti 2010; Lazzeretti/Bondi 2012) have
shown an overwhelming use of adjectives, nouns and other linguistic patterns that express positive
1 A significant example of this kind of service in the field of art is the international network e-flux (www.e-flux.com),
which reaches more than 50.000 visual art professionals on a daily basis through its website, e-mail list and special
projects. Its news digest – e-flux announcements – distributes information on contemporary art exhibitions, publications
and symposia all around the world.
4
evaluation of the exhibition, often insisting on concepts of novelty, exclusiveness, uniqueness, and
quality of the featured events; the inclusion of emotionally charged words, that trigger a reaction
from the audience, in order to excite curiosity around the featured artists or their artworks, and
therefore create news value, especially in the headlines of EPAs; the insertion of quotations and
narrative sections aiming at providing journalists with suggestions and stories they can use; the
recurring mention of a catalogue accompanying the exhibition on sale at bookshops. All these
elements can contribute to classify contemporary EPAs among those professional genres that,
according to Bhatia (2004: 90), are “designed to serve informative purposes”, but “invariably focus
on only positive aspects and incorporate persuasive and sometimes even promotional elements”.
Although press releases in general are openly disregarded by journalists, who often
complain that they are badly written or too enthusiastic and self-celebratory, previous studies
carried out in this field show that media people actually depend on the “information subsidies”
provided by press releases (Gandy 1982: 61), as they cannot cover all newsworthy events in person.
This turns out to be true for art journalists who necessarily rely on EPAs when writing about an
exhibition they did not manage to visit. A golden rule is that you cannot review an exhibition before
seeing it with your own eyes; nonetheless, many critics base their journalistic evaluation on press
materials and interviews previously arranged, often as a consequence of their busy agenda or their
physical distance from the exhibiting venue. Promotional language may therefore survive in their
subsequent coverage, generating “free publicity” (Pander Maat 2007: 63). There is also evidence
that “promotional language is dealt with differently in different sectors of the press” and that
“special interest media are apparently quite willing to recycle promotional elements” (Pander Maat
2007: 93). Probably art magazines and newspapers art sections belong to these categories sharing a
more tolerant approach towards promotionally dressed up press releases, but in order to make
claims in this sense a thorough ethnography-based process analysis should be needed. As suggested
by Catenaccio, Cotter, De Smedt et al. (2011: 1848) “detailed empirical evidence for the journalistic
use of source media” – the ‘‘news transmutation process’’ – could be explored with the help of
current technology, “by tracking electronically and/or ethnographically shifts and changes in the
text as it develops (locally and globally) towards its final version for publication or presentation”.
However, once it has been ascertained that promotionality is a main feature of
contemporary EPAs, a question arises: have promotional features characterized EPAs since their
very first origin, or have they been more recently introduced as a consequence of external factors?
Starting from these two main research questions – the evolution of the genre in view of the
advent of new public relations practices and the origin and reasons of its strong promotional
5
features – a diachronic study on EPAs was carried out in order to find out how the genre has
changed over time, what direction it is taking and what professional challenges lie ahead. An ad hoc
corpus was compiled, the EPA Diacorpus, made up of 300 thousand words (tokens) and including
378 EPAs, half issued by American museums and half by British museums, dating from 1950 to
2009, while corpus linguistics and genre-analysis methodologies were used in order to explore its
content.
The diachronic evolution of EPAs can be put in relation to the great social and cultural
changes taking place over the last decades of the past century, and especially with the advent of new
technologies, new public relations practices and transition towards a more market-oriented concept
of museum. Before starting the analysis, the relevant situational context – museums and public
relations – needs therefore to be briefly outlined in the following section (1.1).
6
1683 Oxford Opening of the Ashmolean Museum
1734 Rome Opening of the Capitoline Museum
1759 London Opening of the British Museum
1768 London Establishment of the Royal Academy of Arts
1785 Madrid Opening of the Prado Museum
1793 Paris Opening of the Louvre Museum
1824 London Opening of the National Gallery
1836 Munich Opening of the Alte Pinakothek
1846 Washington Establishment of the Smithsonian Institution
1852 London Opening of the Victoria and Albert Museum
St.
1852 Opening of the Hermitage Museum
Petersburg
1870 New York Opening of the Metropolitan Museum of Art
1879 London Opening of the National Gallery of British Art (Tate Gallery)
1929 New York Opening of the Museum of Modern Art
1931 New York Opening of the Whitney Museum of American Art
1935 New York Opening of the Frick Collection housed in the former Henry Clay Frick House
Opening of the Guggenheim Foundation's first museum, ‘The Museum of Non-Objective
1939 New York
Painting’
1954 Los Angeles Opening of the J. Paul Getty Museum
1959 New York Opening of the Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum designed by Frank Lloyd Wright
1964 Chicago Opening of the Chicago Museum of Contemporary Art
Tab. 1.1 – Timeline of the most important modern museums in Western Europe and in the United States
7
1.1 The situational context: museums and public relations
The development of a textual genre such as EPAs is strictly related to the innovations faced
by museums from the post-war period up to now and to the gradual introduction of public relations
strategies in their management.
After World War II, in Europe particularly, many art treasures which had been removed for
safety reasons had to be recovered and redisplayed; buildings also had to be refurbished. This
reconstruction provided an opportunity for a new approach towards museums, to be seen as
institutions not only serving scholars but a lay public as well (Lewis 2012). Curators in the larger
museums began to work together with a team of scientists, conservators, designers, educators and
even marketing managers to promote the museum and its work.
In the post-war phase, therefore, a new awareness arose regarding the crucial function
played by public relations in contributing to the overall success of the museum, from raising the
media profile, managing their relationships with stakeholders, to attracting new audiences and
regular attendees.
While the first public museums in history were established in Western Europe, as shown by
Tab. 1.1, providing a timeline of the most important modern museums set up from the 17th century
onwards, the origins of museum public relations can be principally traced back to the United States,
which has a tradition in this field. In the United States the birth of modern public relations is
credited to pioneers like Ivy Lee, a former Wall Street reporter, who became a public relations
counsellor for the Pennsylvania Railroad and the Rockefeller family in 1904, and Edward L.
Bernays, who began to work in 1917 for the war’s publicity front and over the years represented
hundreds of clients in all major fields of business. Bernays is also credited with coining the term
“public relations counsel” in his first book on the subject, Crystallizing Public Opinion, originally
published in 1923.
In Europe the growth of public relations became evident in the late 1940s and throughout the
1950s and 1960s, especially in the United Kingdom, where local governmental authorities were
giving serious consideration to public communications. It was local government officials who were
most responsible for founding the Institute of Public Relations (IPR) in the UK in 1948, the first
organization of professional practitioners.
8
Although relatively little research addresses the field of museum public relations and more
in instructional, rather than theoretical terms (see however Adams 1983, McLean 1997, Schoen
2005, Kotler et al. 2008, Gürel / Kavak 2010), we may assume that the development of a public
relations segment specifically meant for museums started in the US and subsequently spread in
Western Europe. As pointed out by McLean (2012: 42), “marketing was introduced to American
museums at roughly the same period as to UK museums […]. Nevertheless American museums
have led the field in adopting marketing techniques and innovating with marketing practice”. At an
earlier stage, the adoption of public relations practices brought about some concern among museum
administrators, who feared that these may compromise a museum’s authentic mission: according to
Finn (1984:59), the first time public relations specialists worked with museums was on “major
exhibitions – particularly those sponsored by corporations that hope[d] to achieve public relations
benefits” (1984:59). At the time, such commercial aspects sounded ill suited to museums strictly
committed to cultural and educational aims. However, Finn (1984) states that major exhibitions
appeal to the media (and also sponsors) independently from public relations and simply because
they are interesting and newsworthy.
Bearing in mind that public relations have become an integral part of museum operations
and press officers play a very important part in the public relations work conducted by museums
(Kotler et al. 2008), further evidence of the anticipating role played by American museums in this
field may be obtained from exploring the EPA Diacorpus, compiled for the present study. The
collected documents, dating back to the 1950s onwards and issued by nine different American and
British museums, show that in American museums professional press officers were already
employed and mentioned by their names on EPAs since the 1950s, while in British museums
personal press contact is not provided before the end of the 1960s. At the New York Museum of
Modern Arts, for instance, Elizabeth Shaw appears as “publicity director” since 1955; at the
Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum, a public relations consultant, Peter Pollack, is mentioned with
regularity from 1961 onwards. Conversely, EPAs belonging to the London Victoria and Albert
Museum report on the headlines that they are issued by a “Department of Public Relations” only
from 1968 onwards; at the London National Gallery the name of a press officer, Phyllis Rowlands,
is mentioned on EPAs from 1975 onwards, while at the London Royal Academy a curator was
dealing with the press in the early 1970s, Nicholas Usherwood, and a professional press officer –
Griselda Hamilton Baillie – was appointed only afterwards.
The 1950s were also crucial for the development of the textual genre of EPAs in
consideration of the “growing specialization in professional profiles” employed in the media
(Facchinetti et al. 2012: 103). From the half of the century “more and more domains were covered
9
by experts in their fields” (ibi. 103). Thus editors began, for instance, to hire an art expert, so as a
fashion expert or a royal correspondent, in coincidence with the expansion of special sections in the
newspapers. In this period EPAs were delivered by post or even by hand. In absence of a
professional in charge of public relations, museum directors were used to writing EPAs.
After World War II museums became an educational facility, a source of leisure activity,
and a medium of communication. As a result, they also found a new popularity and attracted an
increasing number of visitors. Statistics give an indication of the increase in the number of
museums and in museum visiting. In the United States, of 8,200 museums reported for 1988, 75
percent had been founded since 1950 and 40 percent since 1970. In the 1970s nearly 350 million
visits per year were made to American museums; in 1988 the recorded figure was 566 million. One
of the oldest established museums in Europe – the British Museum – regularly attracted more than 3
million visits a year (Lewis 2012).
Despite governments, particularly in Europe, acknowledged their contribution to museums,
these have been much influenced by changing policies in public sector finance. In the second half of
twentieth century the contribution of public funds to museums has remained static or has fallen, so
that museums’ governing bodies and directors have had to seek funding from alternative sources.
The need for marketing and fund-raising expertise, therefore, has been increasingly accentuated and
the organization of “blockbuster exhibitions” has become central for the financial support art
museums (Alexander and Alexander 2008). These events are not only capable of attracting visitors
and increasing admission income and museum shop sales, but they also allow for cross marketing to
increase tourism citywide. For instance, the 1996 Cezanne retrospective exhibition at the
Philadelphia Museum of Art attracted more than half a million people in three months (Alexander
and Alexander 2008: 44).
Another reflection of the changed financial situation has been the introduction of admission
charges. According to Lewis (2012) in 1984 none of the British national museums charged an entry
fee, while ten years later almost half were doing so. The number of American museums charging
fees for admission increased over a similar period from 32 percent to 55 percent. As pointed out by
McFelter (2007), in August 2006, the Metropolitan Museum of Art in New York created a case
when it announced a 33 percent increase — from $15 to $20 per adult visitor — to bring the Met’s
recommended entry fee in line with those at other New York museums, most notably the Museum
of Modern Art’s $20 charge.
The opportunity of charging admission is under debate not only in the United States, but
also in Britain, where free museums are a great tradition. On one hand, museum theorists argue that
10
admission fees may be the single biggest obstacle preventing museums from fulfilling their
missions as educational institutions:
“If they remain oriented toward their paying customers, museums will never become the
town square that we are so fond of talking about. Drop the charges. I have reluctantly
but unequivocally come to the conclusion that general admission charges are the single
greatest impediment to making our museums truly and fully accessible”
(Heumann Gurian 2006).
On the other hand, an influential British art journalist, Jonathan Jones, recently wrote on the
Guardian website : “charging for entry cannot be a taboo. […] Charging for entry is a better remedy
than selling paintings, closing galleries or sacking staff. Might it even give visitors a keener sense of
the value of some of the greatest experiences it is possible to have?”2.
With increasing economic importance and shrinking sources of income, public relations has
grown in importance for museums. According to McLean (2012), “the most significant threats to
museums come from central and local government” (221). Museums are becoming more dependent
on wealthy benefactors and public subsidy to generate income since the current political climate
lacks long-term vision and policy cohesion. In this time of “financial stringency,” governments also
take a lead role in encouraging museums to market themselves (McLean 2012: 37).
In such a context, EPAs have a great potential, as they build relationships first with the
media and, consequently, with the public, who can become “more involved in the choice and
interpretation of exhibit topics” (Karp et al. 1992: 182).
The use of new technologies by museums took off during the 1990s and grew rapidly during
that decade. The fax, primarily used in the 1980s by businesses and government agencies, in the
1990s became more common among the general public and museums as well. During the 1980s and
the 1990s EPAs were mostly sent to the media via fax. A few years later the Internet made its
breakthrough, and museums began e-mailing and sending documents and scanned images. The
development of websites gave rise to the terms ‘museum without walls’, ‘post-museum’ and ‘virtual
museum’ (Hooper-Greenhill 2000: 152–153). New technologies allowed museums to present more
fluid and wide-ranging communications focused on particular events and conversations. On the
2 http://www.guardian.co.uk/artanddesign/jonathanjonesblog/2011/jul/21/museums-charging-admission-entry-fees.
11
web these include online access to collections and databases; online exhibitions (text, image,
audiovisual); virtual exhibitions (including 360-degree room views); virtual museums, the use of
real and imaginary exhibition and gallery spaces; downloadable and streamed multimedia content
(audio, video, podcasts); interactive gallery maps; dedicated sites, games and play spaces for
children and young people; personalized spaces – creating own favourites and tagging objects; use
of social media (blogs, Facebook, Twitter, Flickr, YouTube), and shopping online (exhibition
tickets, merchandise). Virtual press rooms have also been created, allowing art journalists to access
on line press materials selectively – and EPAs among them –, wherever and whenever they need
them, without even calling the press officer. Although placed in specific press areas within
museum websites and therefore apparently still reserved to a well defined professional category –
journalists – EPAs have been turned into public documents and internet has rapidly changed their
use and language.
Indeed, over the last few decades, conventional public relations strategies, based on mere
press coverage, have been challenged by social media, community relations, and corporate relations
(Grunig, 2009). Nevertheless, media outreach remains a basic component of any museum public
relations strategy (Kotler et al. 2008; Rentschler/Hede, 2007). Media releases, sometimes sent many
months in advance, and media previews are still perceived by museums as useful tools for
influencing the media’s opinion about their exhibitions (Genoways/Ireland, 2003), but also for
driving public opinion and, hopefully, attendance.
1.2 Research directions
The present study is based on a diachronic corpus comprised of 378 EPAs, half issued by
American museums and half by British museums. The collected EPAs are evenly distributed across
six decades: 1950, 1960, 1970, 1980, 1990, 2000. The corpus has been explored in quantitative and
qualitative terms following corpus linguistics and genre-analysis methodologies.
The enquiry addresses the following research questions:
- How has the genre changed in order to face the challenge posed by new
technologies and by Internet in particular?
- Are EPAs threatened by new approaches used in contemporary public
relations, such as social media networks? Are they going to be replaced or will be able to
survive?
12
- Have promotional features characterized the genre of EPAs since its earlier
expressions or have they been more recently introduced as a consequence of external
factors, such as new technologies, development of marketing, economical variables,
globalization?
- What lexical variation can be identified in EPAs from the 1950s up to now?
- Is it possible to identify patterns of sharp growth, decline or stability in the
frequencies of lexical items across the decades?
- Has there been any lexical change reflecting socio-cultural change, for
instance in the way exhibitions are organized, artists and subjects are selected?
- What structural variation can be identified in EPAs from the 1950s up to
now?
- As the corpus is divided into two equal sub-sections, American and British, is
it possible to highlight differences between the two in terms of diachronic variation?
1.3 Outline of contents
With regard to the organization of the thesis, the first part prepares the groundwork for the
study, while the second goes deeper into the analysis. Since the methods applied in the study
combine genre analysis and corpus linguistics, chapter 2–4 aim at introducing both methodologies
extensively. Chapter 2 provides general information on genre theory, the development of written
discourse analysis, the different approaches to genre and recent developments in this field. Chapter
3 and 4 discuss the development of corpus linguistics methodologies, with special attention to
diachronic studies. The relevant domains of EPAs, to be associated with professional discourse and
in particular with media and art discourses, are presented in chapter 5. The design of the corpus, as
well as the methods applied in the analysis, are presented in chapter 6 and 7. In chapters 8 and 9 the
main analysis is carried out: the EPA Diacorpus is explored with regard to lexical and structural
variation respectively. Conclusions are eventually drawn in chapter 10.
13
2. Theoretical background: genre analysis
The analysis carried out in this dissertation is based on the frameworks of genre analysis, a
methodology which can be regarded as the result of a gradual development in written discourse
analysis. Genre analysis is traditionally addressed from three different perspectives: the English for
Specific Purposes (ESP), the Systemic Functional Linguistics (SFL) and the New Rhetoric (NR).
This study follows in particular the ESP approach. Nonetheless, the three perspectives are
considered as complementary rather than contradictory in terms of analytical applications in this
study.
First an overview of the historical evolution of written discourse analysis and thus also of
genre theory will be provided; secondly, the different approaches to genre and genre analysis will
be presented, explaining how they can be applied in the present work.
2.1 Historical development of written discourse analysis
Following Bhatia (2004), it is possible to divide the historical development of written
discourse analysis into three distinct, yet overlapping phases. The first focuses on the textualisation
of lexico-grammatical resources, the second on the regularities of organisation, while the third
highlights contextualisation of discourse. Each of them will be discussed in turn.
2.1.1 First phase: textualisation of lexico-grammar
In this phase language description primarily involved the surface level of language, i.e.
scholars focused on statistically relevant features of lexico-grammar used in a particular subset of
texts associated with a particular discipline. A seminal publication in this sense is Halliday,
McIntosh and Strevens (1964), which introduces the concept of register analysis and presents the
description of language varieties used in particular disciplines or occupations, based on statistical
differences in lexis and syntax: “Language varies as its function varies; it differs in different
situations. The name given to a variety of a language distinguished according to its use is register”
(Halliday/McIntosh/Strevens 1964: 87).
Pointing to the need to direct English teaching to meet the emerging requirements of “an
institutional kind”, mention is made of “English for civil servants; for policemen; for officials of the
law; for dispensers and nurses; for specialists in agriculture; for engineers and fitters”
14
(Halliday/McIntosh/Strevens 1964: 189). To cater for these special needs for English, linguistic
analyses of the “registers” associated with each have to be carried out:
“Every one of these specialized needs requires, before it can be met by appropriate
teaching materials, detailed studies of restricted languages and special registers carried
out on the basis of large samples of the language used by the particular persons
concerned. It is perfectly possible to find out just what English is used in the operation
of power stations in India: once this has been observed, recorded and analysed, a
teaching course to impart such language behaviour can at last be devised with
confidence and certainty.” (Halliday/McIntosh/Strevens 1964: 190)
One of the first studies exploring frequently occurring language patterns was the work of
Barber (1962) on research articles, entitled “Some memorable characteristics of modern scientific
prose”.
Among the aims of the study were to identify recurring lexico-grammatical features and
common modal verbs that were particular to scientific prose. For this purpose, a genre-based corpus
study was carried out. In the literature there is common agreement on the importance of Barber’s
(1962) contribution to the description of language. It is still widely seen as influential, especially in
regard to English for Specific Purposes (ESP). Although its intentions were mostly pedagogic, the
paper clearly shows the distinctive use of lexis and syntax in scientific textbooks, demonstrating
that the progressive verb forms are very rarely used in scientific writing.
Since computational methods were not fully developed at that time, the analytical findings
of these early studies were limited to a few relevant features of the selected texts rather than
considering the corpus in its entirety. Gustaffson (1975), for instance, focused on one syntactic
feature of legal discourse, i.e. binomials and multinomials. Similarly did Swales and Bhatia (1983)
in their study on nominalization in legal discourse.
The interest in specialized fields and texts, as well as the focus on the surface level
description (and thus on the description of recurring lexical items and grammatical structures)
served well the purpose of ESP studies (Bhatia 2004: 5). In English language teaching, in fact, these
studies gave rise to the view that there are important differences among languages associated to
different professional contexts; for instance, between the English of commerce and the one of
engineering. Regarding to ESP this idea has developed into English courses for specific groups of
learners. Most of the work at this time was devoted to English for Science and Technology (EST),
but there were studies in other fields too, such as the analysis of doctor-patient communication by
15
Bruton, Candlin and Leather (1976). In short, the motto of ESP at that time was: ‘Tell me what you
need English for and I will tell you the English that you need’ (Hutchinson/Water 1987: 8).
A common criticism of register analysis is that it is purely descriptive and not explanatory:
it tells us the relative frequency of linguistic forms, but not the special functions these forms have in
the specific register and what purpose their marked presence or absence may serve (Bhatia 1993:6).
These studies commonly referred to as register studies were “useful in the sense that they
provide empirical evidence to confirm or disprove some of the intuitive and impressionistic
statements we all tend to make about the high or low incidence of certain syntactic features of
variety of languages”. However, “they tell us nothing [...] to what purpose such features are
markedly present or absent in a particular variety” (Bhatia 1993: 6).
Nonetheless, even in this first phase, some scholars tried to go beyond the surface level of
language and developed an interest on the functional value of lexico-grammatical features. Swales’
(1974) work on the function of –en particles in chemistry texts is one of the most representative and
striking examples of this development. His investigation demonstrates that –en particles occupy a
central role in scientific discourse, as they fulfil specific rhetorical functions. The following text
(Swales 1974: 18) provides an example of the use of –en particles:
A given bottle contains a compound which upon analysis is shown to contain 0.600
gram-atom of phosphorous and 1.500 gram-atom of oxygen.
Since attribution is an important convention in science, -en particles signal that the writer is
introducing a generalization, preventing unnecessary and irrelevant inquiries regarding the detail of
the experiment.
Another development in this first phase of written discourse analysis involved the
investigation of discourse organization.
Scholars such as Brown and Yule (1983), van Dijk (1985), Beaugrande and Dressler (1981)
focused on developing a relationship between the choice of lexico-grammar and specific forms of
discourse organization. Cohesion and coherence were of particular interest as well as the macro-
structures and information structures of discourse. Brown and Yule (1983), for instance, analysed
small local units at the level of phrase or clause, exploring how information is packaged within
them. A range of forms, intonational and syntactic, were examined in order to determine the
information status as “given” or “new”. For instance, in the following example, the expression
italicised has been identified as referring to a “given” entity:
16
Mary got some beer out of the car
The beer was warm
(Brown/Yule 1983: 170)
Another significant departure from the surface-level description of language and register
analysis was provided by Coulthard (1977), who, following Hymes (1972), introduced the concepts
of ethnography of communication, speech community and speech styles. According to Coulthard
(1977), the concept of style may seem very close to that of register, but there is a crucial difference:
“registers are mainly defined and recognized by topic and context-specific lexis – the register of
sermons is the language used in giving sermons; styles, however, as the rules of alternation
emphasize, are not mechanically connected to particular situations – speaker may choose among
styles and their choices have social meaning” (Coulthard 1977: 40).
A common characteristic of the studies belonging to the phase of textualisation of lexico-
grammar is to extend the scope of analysis from clause-level units to larger rhetorical structure,
anticipating the next phase of development.
2.1.2 Second phase: organisation of discourse
The analysis of larger stretches of discourse encouraged analysts to study the specific
contexts associated to the texts and to identify more global structures in various discourse types.
Scholars began to focus on the identification of discourse patterns and on the regularities of
organization in discourse: for instance in terms of problem-solution structures, as in Hoey (1983),
rhetorical structures, as in Widdowson (1973), or schematic structures, as in van Dijk (1988). This
research direction opened the way to the ESP approach to genre, to be dealt in section 2.2.1.
This second phase can be subdivided into three different developments (Bhatia 2004: 9).
The first was concerned primarily with the structure of specialised discourse; the second
investigated more general patterns of organisation; the third focused on the macro-structure and the
correlating communicative purpose(s) of academic or professional genres.
Establishing a relation between discourse structures and communicative purposes was a
crucial step in the development of genre analysis: scholars engaged in this direction, such as John
Swales and Vijay Bhatia, interpreted regularities in the structures of textual genres not simply in
terms of schematic patterns but as “moves” functional to the needs of professional or academic
communities. The approach of analysing texts as genres opened possibilities to investigate how and
why members of an academic or professional community produce genres. In contrast to text-
17
linguistics and the focus on lexico-grammatical features, genre theory allowed “a thicker
description of language” (Bhatia 1993: 39- 40), taking into account socio-cultural as well as
psychological factors (Bhatia 1993: 16).
Genre theory as a means of written discourse analysis emerged in the 1990s and soon
became a fashionable field of research (Bhatia 2004: 9-10). Studies performed in the 1990s mainly
concerned academic (Swales 1990) and professional genres, in particular legal and business genres
(Bhatia 1993). Even though the interest in genre was constantly growing, different frameworks for
genre analysis were established.
During this phase, a seminal definition of genre was provided by Swales (1981, 1986, 1990):
“Genre is a recognizable communicative event characterized by a set of communicative
purpose(s) identified and mutually understood by the members of the professional or
academic community in which it regularly occurs. Most often it is highly structured and
conventionalized with constraints on allowable contributions in terms of their intent,
positioning, form and functional value. These constraints, however, are often exploited
by the expert members of the discourse community to achieve private intentions within
the framework of socially recognized purpose(s)”. (quoted in Bhatia 1993: 13)
Swales’ (1990) well-known and influential analysis of research article introductions, which
he called CARS (Creating a Research Space), provided a fundamental framework for genre-
analysis. In analyzing research article (RA) introductions, Swales (1990) first identifies the typical
“moves” authors make within the introduction:
Move 1: Establishing a territory
Step 1: Claiming centrality and/or
Step 2: Making topic generalisation(s) and/or
Step 3: Reviewing items of previous research
Move 2: Establishing a niche
Step 1: A Counter-claiming or
Step 1: B Indicating a gap or
Step 1: C Question-raising or
Step 1: D Continuing a tradition
Move 3: Occupying the niche
Step 1: A Outlining a purpose or
18
Step 1: B Announcing present research
Step 2: Announcing principal findings
Step 3: Indicating research article structure
(Swales 1990: 141)
Swales and Feak (2000) have defined a “move” as a “bounded communicative act that is
designed to achieve one main communicative objective” within the larger communicative objective
of the genre) (35). Swales (1990) identifies three main moves for RA introductions: ‘establishing a
territory’ (move 1) , ‘establishing a niche’ (move 2) , ‘occupying the niche’ (move 3) (141). Within
each of these moves, Swales identifies a range of possible ‘steps’ authors can take, such as
“claiming centrality” and “reviewing items of previous research” in move 1 and “counter-claiming”
or “indicating a gap” in move 2. From there, Swales examines steps more specifically by analyzing
text-patterning and lexico-grammatical features within different steps. In analyzing step 3
(reviewing items of previous research) within move 1 (establishing a territory), for instance, Swales
looks at patterns of citation, noting patterns in which authors either name the researcher being cited
in their citing sentence or reference the researcher in parenthesis at the end of the sentence or in end
notes. Moving from text-patterning to lexico-grammatical features, Swales then identifies the
frequency of ‘reporting verbs’ (such as show, establish, claim, etc.) that authors use “to introduce
previous researchers and their findings” (150).
It has also to be ascribed to this phase the identification of an influential analytical
framework for analyzing unfamiliar genres, Bhatia’s seven steps (1993: 22-36), which is
reproduced below:
1. Placing the given genre text in a situational context.
2. Surveying existing literature.
3. Refining the situational/ contextual analysis.
4. Selecting and analysing corpus.
5. Studying the institutional context.
6. Levels of linguistic analysis
Level 1 – the quantitative analyses of lexico – grammatical features.
Level 2 – the analyses of text – patterning or textualisation.
Level 3 – the analyses of structural interpretation of genres.
7. Specialist information genre analysis.
(Bhatia 1993: 22-36)
19
The first step involves placing a given genre-text in its situational context. Step two involves
surveying the existing research on the genre. With the genre identified and contextualized, step
three involves refining the researcher’s understanding of the genre’s discourse community. This
includes identifying the writers and readers who use the genre and determining their goals and
relationships to one another, as well as the material conditions in which they function — in short,
identifying the “reality” which the genre represents. Step four involves the researcher collecting a
corpus of the genre. Step five introduces an ethnographic dimension, with Bhatia (1993)
recommending that the researcher conduct an ethnography of the institutional context in which the
genre takes place in order to gain “naturalistic” insight into the conditions in which members of a
discourse community use the genre. Step six moves from context to text and involves the decision
regarding which level of linguistic analysis to explore: lexico-grammatical features (for example,
quantitative/statistical study of tenses, clauses, and other syntactic properties, including stylistic
analysis), text-patterning (for example, the patterns in which language is used in a particular genre,
such as how and why noun phrases and nominalizations are used in different genres), and structural
interpretation (for example, the structural ‘moves’ a genre utilizes to achieve its goals, such as the
three-move CARS structure of research article introductions as described by Swales 1990). In the
final step, Bhatia advises researchers to seek a specialist informant from the research site to verify
findings.
This general approach to genre analysis within ESP - from identifying purpose to analyzing
a genre’s rhetorical moves and how these moves are carried out textually and linguistically - and the
research that has emerged from it has contributed greatly to our knowledge of discipline-specific
genres, notably research articles as well as what Swales has called “occluded genres” that operate
behind the scenes of research articles (genres such as conference abstracts, submission letters,
review letters, etc.). Such knowledge has enabled graduate-level non-native speakers of English to
gain access to and participate in academic and professional discourse communities.
2.1.3 Third phase: contextualisation of discourse
So far, it has been demonstrated that the focus of written discourse analysis shifted from
lexico-grammatical features of texts to the patterns of discourse organisation. In recent years, the
focus has been on the context of discourse (Bhatia 2004: 11). Whereas some researchers continued
20
with the tradition of genre analysis and expanded the approach, in the sense that they raised issues
such as the hybridisation, dynamism and constellations of genres (Bazermann 1994,
Berkenkotter/Hucking 1995), others moved towards a multi-perspective view towards genre (Bhatia
2004).
Instead of focusing on “simplified and idealized genres”, Bhatia (2004: XIV) pointed out
that genres should be regarded as dynamic and sometimes hybrid in nature. There is a considerable
gap between the idealized genres (mainly covered by the literature on genre) and the genres used in
the real world (ibid.). In order to bridge this gap, Bhatia (2004) advocates another view of genre,
which moves towards a multi-perspective and multidimensional genre concept.
Bhatia (2004) suggests “a multi-perspective four-space model of discourse analysis”, as
illustrated in the diagram below:
Figure 2.1 - A multi-perspective four-space model of discourse analysis (Bhatia 2004: 19)
21
For Bhatia (2004: 19) genre theory should take into account not only the surface-level
properties of discourse, i.e. the textual space, corresponding to the first oval in the diagram, but also
the socio-cognitive factors that influence the construction, interpretation and analysis of genres.
These are determined by the institutional or professional context in which the text is constructed,
interpreted and exploited by experts in order to achieve specific goals (tactical space and
professional space, identified by the middle oval in the diagram). The interaction with the context
can be taken even further, widening the perspective to a broader social space (identified by the
upper part of the diagram). One can investigate, for instance, “the changing identities of the
participants, the social structures or professional relationships the genre are likely to maintain or
change, and the advantages or disadvantages such genres are likely to bring to a particular set of
readers” (2004: 20). The four-space model indicates two main directions for the analysis of written
discourse, namely a pedagogic and a socio-critical perspective. Thus Bhatia encourages a third
view, which look at discourse essentially as a genre within socio-cognitive space, but does not
ignore textual features of language use, that is a generic perspective (2004:21).
The socio-cognitive factors have traditionally been neglected (Bhatia 2004: 112), since the
main focus was on the analysis of linguistic factors, text-internal factors such as contextual features
(e.g. audience, attitude, social distance, background), textual features (e.g. text patterns) or
intertextual features (e.g. surrounding texts). These text-internal features were used (mainly by the
genre analysts themselves) to access genres. It has been suggested that members of a specific
discipline tend to use text-external factors such as discursive practices (e.g. common modes of
communication) and procedures (who does what at what stage and by which means) as well as
knowledge regarding the disciplinary culture (professional goals and conventions) to approach
specific genres. Therefore, discursive practices, discursive procedures and disciplinary culture
should be ascribed greater value.
In the multi-perspective model of genre suggested by Bhatia (2004), generic competence
and professional expertise play a very significant role. It is important to understand how
professional experts become experts. Professional expertise is developed slowly but gradually “in
different ways and at different stages” (Bhatia 2004: 147). Broadly speaking, Bhatia (2004: 146)
differentiates three elements that contribute to professional expertise: professional practice,
disciplinary knowledge and discursive competence. The latter also includes generic competence
(the competence of mastering genres in order to function within a discourse community) (Bhatia
2004: 145). These three key elements contribute to form professional expertise.
As far as genre analysis in the multi-perspective model is concerned, it can be said that
genre is investigated in a four-part framework for analysis, involving: textual space (lexico-
22
grammatical features, their textualisation, discourse patterns); socio-cognitive space, also referred to
as tactical space (professional practices, discoursive practices); socio-critical concerns (ideology
and power); and ethnographic concerns (beliefs, attitudes and social structure) (Bhatia 2004: 160-
163). This model of genre and genre analysis is insightful as it draws from different perspectives.
By moving towards a multi-perspective view of genre and genre analysis we are more likely to find
increasing flexibility, fluidity and tentativeness in our understanding of generic integrity. This may
be a consequence of blurred boundaries between genres increasing tendencies toward mixing and
embedding of genres, and a natural inclination on the part of expert users of language for innovation
and creativity in their construction as well as consumption of genres in real-life contexts (Bhatia
2004: 181).
In this section of the study the developments of written discourse analysis were mentioned,
from textualisation to organization and contextualization. Next a description of different approaches
adopted in genre analysis will be provided: the ESP approach, the Systemic Functional approach,
and the New Rhetoric approach.
2.2 Approaches to genre analysis
Hyon (1996) has classified the approaches to genre analysis into three pathways, which
highlight the origins of the diverse genre frameworks: the Systemic Functional approach, the New
Rhetoric approach and the English for Specific Purposes approach. While Hyon classifies the
approaches to genre in terms of scholarly traditions, Flowerdew (2002) argues that genre theories
can be broadly distinguished as primarily linguistic or non-linguistic in their orientation. According
to Flowerdew (2002), a primarily linguistic approach focuses on textual features and the rhetorical
realisation of a text’s social purpose, while a non-linguistic approach focuses more on the
situational context and the attitudes and behaviours of a discourse community: “the linguistic
approach looks to the situational context to interpret the linguistic and discourse structures, whereas
the New Rhetoric may look to the text to interpret the situational context” (Flowerdew 2002: 91–
92). Flowerdew’s distinction is useful for signalling not only a researcher’s theoretical orientation
but also the researcher’s primary focus as foregrounding either text or context, depending on the
researcher’s purpose. The first approach to be introduced in the following section will be the
Systemic Functional approach.
23
2.2.1 The Systemic Functional approach
Also referred to as the Australian Systemic Functional approach or simply the Australian
School or Sydney School (Bhatia 2004: 10; Hyon 1996: 696), it is mainly based on the work of
Systemic Functional linguists from Sydney in Australia, such as Michael Halliday, Ruqaiya Hasan
and James R. Martin. This approach to genre is an extension of register theory, which is concerned
with the contextual variables of field (institutional activity), tenor (social interaction) and mode
(medium of communication). Field refers to what is happening in a specific situation, whereas tenor
is linked to the participants, and their roles and relationships in the situation. Mode describes the
language that is used in more detail, and the channel of communication and function of language in
a specific context (Halliday/Martin 1993: 32-33). In Martin’s (1992) view, field, tenor and mode
together form register (Martin 1992: 495, Halliday/Martin 1993: 33). Register is “a semantic
concept” that describes “a configuration of meanings that are typically associated with a particular
situational configuration of field, mode and tenor” (Halliday/Hasan 1989: 38-39). These contextual
features influence the patterns of texts, such as text structures and lexico-grammatical patterns of a
particular text, because, as Whittaker and Rojo (1999) pointed out, speakers or writers of a
particular language know the recognized ways to get things done using the language in a specific
situation, then they are more likely to make choices in the lexico-grammar of the language. So for
Systemic Functional linguists the relationship between texts and contexts is predictable. Genres are
defined as ‘staged, goal-oriented social processes that people engage in as members of their culture’
(Martin 1984: 25), which are realized through the register variables of field, tenor and mode.
Systemic functional linguists developed practical schemes for categorizing texts in a
particular environment of context, such as Hasan’s Generic Structure Potential (GSP) and Martin’s
Schematic Structure (SS). According to the GSP approach (Hasan 1978), texts can be categorized
into a particular genre on the basis of the occurrence of obligatory and optional elements. The
ordering and the recursion of these elements have to be taken into account as well. The
fundamentals of this model are succinctly summarized in the following quotation:
“…associated with each genre of text –i.e. type of discourse– is a generalised structural
formula, which permits an array of actual structures. Each complete text must be a
realisation of a structure from such an array The generic membership of the text is
determined by reference to the structural formula to which the actual structure can be
shown to belong. A text will be perceived as incomplete if only a part of some
recognizable actual structure is realized in it; and the generic provenance of a text will
24
remain undetermined, if the part so realized is not even recognizable as belonging to
some distinct actual structure.” (Hasan 1978: 229)
In his SS framework, which can be considered as a further evolution of the GSP, Martin
(1992) suggests a three-level procedure of text analysis, based on genre, register and language.
These are rearranged in hierarchical series, linked by realization: choices in genre are realised by
those in register and these, in turn, by choices in language itself. As Martin (1985: 251) pointed out,
genre “represents at an abstract level the verbal strategies used to accomplish social purposes of
many kinds”. These strategies can be thought of in terms of stages through which language users
move in order to realize a genre, and it is here that the concept of schematic structures comes in. A
schematic structure is the expression of purpose or the goal of the social activity. Texts therefore
reflect the generic cultural choices of the society where the texts appear (Martin 1992). In a more
recent definition given by Martin, finally genres are seen as “configurations of meaning that are
recurrently phased together to enact social practices” (Martin 2002: 269).
2.2.2 The New Rhetoric approach
Also referred to as (North American) New Rhetoric studies, the American School or simply
New Rhetoric, this approach explores the socio-contextual aspects of genre, the action a particular
genre aims to accomplish, and how these aspects might change through time (Paltridge 1997).
Genre studies in the New Rhetoric focus less on features of the text and more on relations between
text and context often by employing ethnographic research or case study methods. Among the
scholars representing the New Rhetoric are Bazerman (1994), Freedman and Medway (1994),
Bizzell (1992), Berkenkotter and Huckin (1995) and, in particular, Miller (1984, 1994).
In her fundamental 1984 essay, ‘Genre as social action’, Miller highlights five main features
of genre as social action: 1) Genre refers to a conventional category of discourse based in large
scale typification of rhetorical meaningful action; 2) As a meaningful action, genre is interpretable
by means of rules which occur at relatively high levels of the hierarchy; 3) Genre is a form at one
particular level that is a fusion of lower level forms and characteristic substance; 4) Genre serves as
the substance of forms at higher levels; and 5) A genre is a rhetorical means for mediating private
intentions and social exigence (Miller 1994:37). Consequently, genre lies in the middle ground
between the individual and society and analysing genres, we can explain the social process in which
writing by individuals is influenced. This point is particularly relevant for the present study, where
25
EPAs are examined in conjunction with social and cultural factors which may influence their
writing.
Moreover, Miller argues for an open principle of genre classification based on rhetorical
practice, rather than a closed one based solely on structure, substance, or aim, as “genres change,
evolve and decay” (1994:36) and do not lend themselves to any taxonomy.
Berkenkotter and Huckin (1995) share the dynamic view of genre with Miller; they also
point out that, although professional genres constitute social structures in professional, institutional,
and organisational contexts, every author of a professional genre also has an individual structure as
the result of creativity, freedom and individual intention and strategies. Although authors are free
to use their own writing style, they have to comply with the constraints imposed by the community
for a particular genre. In Berkenkotter and Huckin’s definition:
“Genre are the media through which scholars and scientists communicate with their
peers. Genres are intimately linked to a discipline’s methodology, and they package
information in ways that conform to a discipline’s norm, values, and ideology.
Understanding the genres of written communication in one’s field is, therefore, essential
to professional success”. (Berkenkotter/Huckin 1995: 1)
Berkenkotter and Huckin developed a framework for genre study based on five principles.
In first place genres are dynamic, in the sense that they develop in response to recurring situations
and change over time when the discourse community and its members’ perceptions of the world
change as well. Secondly, genres are ‘situated’ in a discourse community: in order to gain the
knowledge of a genre, one has to participate in the communicative activities of its relevant
professional community. Genre knowledge, “rather than being explicitly taught, is transmitted
through enculturation as apprentices become socialized to the ways of speaking in particular
disciplinary communities” (Berkenkotter/Huckin, 1995:7). As a third principle, “what constitutes
true genre knowledge is not just a knowledge of formal conventions but a knowledge of appropriate
topics and relevant details as well” (Berkenkotter/Huckin, 1995:15). Genre knowledge, therefore,
involves both form and content. The fourth principle deals with the duality of structure performed
by genres: on one hand they identify a formal model, on the other they shape the professional and
institutional community to which they belong. Fifth and last principle, called ‘community
ownership’, states that genres also carry the values of a discourse community, mediated by norms
and conventions.
26
Some New Rhetoric scholars (Bazerman 1994) have made use of ethnographic methods
such as interviews and observations in order to investigate genres. Among them is Yates and
Orlikowski’s (1992) study, which provide a diachronic analysis of the memo and the business
report. Yates and Orlikowski (1992) suggest that genres evolve over time in mutual interaction with
institutional practices and individual actions. Moreover, “genres emerge within a particular socio-
historical context and are reinforced over time as a situation recurs […] these genres, in turn, shape
the future response to a similar situation.” (Yates/Orlikowski 1992: 305).
Since genres are seen as social action, ethnographic methods enable researchers to retrieve
information regarding socio-contextual aspects such as the attitude of community members towards
specific genres (Hyon 1996: 698).
In general terms, New Rhetoric scholars mainly explore genres in terms of social functions
and their contexts rather than text structure or form, thus describing genres, their roles and context
(Hyon 1996: 703).
2.2.3 The ESP approach
Referred to as the British ESP School (Bhatia 2004: 10), it is represented by the works of
Swales (1990) and Bhatia (1993), which has been already outlined in section 2.1.2. Genre analysis
studies in this tradition have typically focused on patterns of rhetorical organization and genre-
specific language features. In the ESP perspective, discourse structures are usually described in
terms of moves, and an important role is given to communicative purpose. The tradition of ESP
research describes the language and discourse features of specific genres, applying the information
acquired in ESP teaching materials.
According to Bhatia (1997), genres serve the goals of specific discourse communities,
tending to establish relatively stable structural forms and even constraining the use of lexico-
grammatical resources in expressing these forms. It is the writer’s communicative purpose that
determines the formal characteristics, such as grammatical and lexical choices, of a genre text
(Dudley-Evans 1994: 219). It is therefore the communicative purpose of a genre that allows it to be
differentiated from other genres (ibid.). As previously mentioned, Swales (1990: 58) defined genre
as “a class of communicative events, the members of which share some set of communicative
purposes”; moreover, “these purposes are recognised by the expert members of the parent discourse
community, and therefore constitute the rationale for the genre” (1990: 58). The role of
communicative purpose as a quick method for assigning genre membership was later revised by
27
Askehave and Swales (2001), suggesting that purpose should not be a criterion for the immediate
identification of genre, but a resulting discovery of the process of analysis itself.
The notion of ‘discourse community’ is linked by Swales (1990: 24-27) to six features: a set
of common public goals; established mechanisms of intercommunication; information and feedback
through a participatory mechanism; one or more genres to further the community’s aims; specific
lexis; membership includes both ‘apprentices’ and experts with suitable degree of relevant
expertise.
Working in the direction established by Swales, Bhatia (1993, 2004) combined language
analysis with the exploration of the socio-cognitive and cultural factors contributing to genre
construction, interpretation, use and exploitation. He also shifted from a predominantly pedagogic
perspective towards professional and institutional settings: the real worlds of written discourse.
Bhatia’s (2004) concept of genre deviates from established boundaries and limits, and takes into
account mixing and embedding of genres. Generic integrity is not static but developing in
concordance with a particular generic event. Bhatia’s studies (1993, 2004) bridge the gap between
the New Rhetoric and Systemic Functional Linguistics schools of genre studies, on the base of a
multidimensional approach for analysis of academic, professional and institutional discourse.
Bhatia (2004:23) summarized some of the common ground of genre studies as follows.
1. Genres are recognizable communicative events, characterized by a set of communicative
purposes identified and mutually understood by members of the professional or academic
community in which they regularly occur.
2. Genres are highly structured and conventionalised constructs, with constraints on
allowable contributions not only in terms of the intentions one would like to give expression to and
the shape they often take, but also in terms of the lexico-grammatical resources one can employ to
give discoursal values to such formal features.
3. Established members of a particular professional community will have a much greater
knowledge and understanding of the use and exploitation of genres than those who are apprentices,
new members or outsiders.
4. Although genres are viewed as conventionalised constructs, expert members of the
disciplinary and professional communities often exploit generic resources to express not only
‘private’ but also organizational intentions within the constructs of ‘socially recognized
communicative purposes’.
28
5. Genres are reflections of disciplinary and organizational cultures, and in that sense, they
focus on social actions embedded within disciplinary, professional and other institutional practices.
6. All disciplinary and professional genres have integrity of their own, which is often
identified with reference to a combination of textual, discursive and contextual factors.
Based on the understanding of the three approaches to genre theory, Bhatia (2004) put
forward a comprehensive definition of genre:
“Genre essentially refers to language use in a conventionalised communicative setting
in order to give expression to a specific set of communicative goals of a disciplinary or
social institution, which give rise to stable structural forms by imposing constraints on
the use of lexico-grammatical as well as discoursal resources”. (Bhatia 2004: 23)
Bhatia’s (2004) multidimensional approach to real world discourse informs the present study
in many ways, as it provides a framework for the examination of a genre – in this case EPAs - by
addressing textual, socio-cognitive and social factors. Moreover, Bhatia’s model allows different
analytical perspectives to be applied at the same time: from textual analysis to ethnographic
exploration, to socio-historical research. The genre of EPAs can be approached in terms of
reflection of a discursive practice in a specific professional community, but also as genre in action,
grounded in the experience of experts members of that community and shaped by their ever-
changing goals. In particular, Bhatia (1993, 2004) provides a framework based on a series of steps,
which served as a basis for this study, although attempts were made in order to incorporate stimuli
from Systemic Functional Linguistics and New Rhetoric genre studies. For instance, in the
analytical process, special emphasis was placed on linguistic choices influenced by the economic
and social system of the writers, as required by SFL, and on the definition of the values shared by
professional communities participating in the genre of EPAs, as typical of NR. To a broader extent,
a multi-perspective analysis was carried out, in order to provide a narrowly detailed account of the
evolution of EPAs over time.
It has to be noted that a similar synthesis among these approaches is also pursued by genre
analysts who focus on the process through which genres are generated and how they change over
time (see Garzone et al. 2012). About three decades after the emergence of genre analysis, this
perspective represents one of its most interesting developments and is particularly relevant for the
29
underlying study. As it implies a diachronic approach to genre analysis, we will deal with that more
specifically in chapter 4 of this thesis, devoted to modern diachronic linguistics.
2.3 Summary
In this chapter the development of written discourse analysis was outlined, explaining the
shift of interest from text linguistic to discourse organisation, to contextualisation of discourse and,
eventually, towards a multi-perspective approach to genre. The different approaches to genre were
also introduced, placing special emphasis on the ESP approach and Bhatia’s (1993, 2004) multi-
dimensional model for analyzing genres, as they serve as frameworks for this dissertation.
Genre analysis as introduced by Bhatia (1993) involves working with corpora. The
convergence of genre and corpora has proven to be insightful, especially in the field of ESP. The
next chapter is therefore dedicated to genre corpus-based studies.
30
3. Theoretical background: corpus studies
Following McEnery et al. 2006 (4) the term ‘corpus’ in modern linguistics can be defined as
“a collection of sampled texts, written or spoken, in machine-readable form which may be
annotated with various forms of linguistic information”. Despite the differing opinions, there is an
increasing consensus on four main qualities for corpora: 1) they have to be machine-readable; 2)
they have to include authentic texts, which can be 3) sampled in order to be 4) representative of a
particular language or language variety (McEnery et al. 2006: 5).
Advantages of using electronic corpora are, in the first place, the speed of processing data;
secondly, the ease of manipulating data accurately and consistently; thirdly, the possibility to avoid
human bias in the analysis and, lastly, the possibility to enrich the corpus texts with various
metadata (annotation). Given the prominence of computers in corpus linguistics it comes as no
surprise that this methodology1 has been also named computer corpus linguistics (CCL), as
suggested by Leech 1992: 106.
As the present dissertation is based on a multiple diachronic corpus, which is a further and
more complex development of the basic idea of corpus, the history of corpus linguistics
methodologies has to be previously outlined. This chapter aims therefore at explaining how corpus
linguistics works and at presenting the most relevant issues in the field.
3.1 Research on corpora: origin and issues
Although the term corpus linguistics appeared only in the early 1980s, research on corpora
dates back to the pre-Chomskyan period – 1940s; as McEnery et al. 2006 pointed out, at that time
linguists “would have used shoeboxes filled with paper slips rather than computers as a means of
data storage”, nonetheless their methodology was already corpus-based, in the sense that it was
empirical and based on observed data. In the late 1950s the corpus methodology was severely
criticized because of the alleged “skewedness” of corpora (Chomsky 1962): at that time, as a matter
of fact, corpora were paper-based and too small to be representative. Afterwards, with new
developments in technology and with the aid of more powerful computers, exploiting massive
corpora became possible.
The first modern corpus, the Brown Corpus, was built in the early 1960s. It was prepared at
Brown University in the United States by W. Nelson Francis and consists of one million words of
1 In this study we maintain that corpus linguistics is a methodology with a wide range of applications across many areas
of linguistics, although it has been argued that it ‘goes well beyond this methodological role’ (Tognini-Bonelli 2001: 1)
31
American English (see Francis/Kucera 1979). In the late 1970s the Lancaster-Oslo/Bergen Corpus
of British English (LOB) appeared, mirroring the Brown with regard to British English (see
Johansson, Leech, and Goodluck 1978; Johansson 1986). Since then, corpus methodology has
become very popular, especially in the last decades, with a great impact on linguistics and language
teaching.
Texts collected in LOB and Brown are divided into the following categories: A. Press:
reportage; B. Press: editorials; C. Press: reviews; D. Religion; E. Skills, trades and hobbies; F.
Popular lore; G. Belles lettres, biography, and essays; H. Miscellaneous; J. Learned and scientific
writing; K. General fiction; L. Mystery and detective fiction; M. Science fiction; N. Adventure and
western fiction; P. Romance and love story; R. Humour. However, LOB and Brown consist of text
samples, not full texts, and so are not genre-oriented.
At the beginning of the 1990s, FLOB (the Freiburg version of LOB) and Frown (the
Freiburg version of Brown), i.e. replicas matching their predecessors closely, both as regards size
and composition, were compiled at the University of Freiburg under the supervision of Christian
Mair (see Hundt/Sand/Siemund 1998; Hundt/Sand/Skandera 1999). The texts used for these two
corpora were published in 1991 and 1992 respectively, approximately thirty years later than those
found in LOB and Brown. When the two new corpora were submitted for international distribution,
it was thus possible to make computer-based comparative studies of texts published at a thirty-year
interval. The British branch of the Brown family is continuing to grow: in late 2007 at Lancaster
University began the collection of British English 2006 (BE06), a one million word corpus of mid-
2000s written, published British English. Text collection was completed in May 2008 (Baker 2009).
Parallel to the growth of corpus linguistics has been a shift to increasingly larger corpora,
such as the British National Corpus (BNC) and the American National Corpus (ANC).
The BNC comprises 100 million words organized in more than 4000 written texts and
transcripts of speech in modern British English. It is designed to represent as wide a range of
modern British English as possible. The written section (90 per cent) includes, among many other
types of text, samples from regional and national newspapers, specialist periodicals and journals for
all ages and interests, academic books and unpublished letters and memoranda, as well as school
and university essays. The spoken section (10 per cent) includes 863 transcripts of informal
conversations collected in all kind of different contexts, from formal business or government
meetings to radio shows. The American National Corpus is an American match for the BNC, as it
contains at least 100 million words, comparable across genres with the BNC.
In the 1990s the groundbreaking work by John Sinclair marked a milestone in corpus
linguistics. Sinclair and his group developed the Cobuild project (an acronym for Collins
32
Birmingham University International Language Database), also known as the Bank of English. A
large corpus of contemporary English (mainly British, but American and Australian data are also
included) was gathered from spoken and written sources, and each word in turn was studied for its
lexical, grammatical, semantic, stylistic and pragmatic features. The information was entered into a
database from which the Cobuild dictionaries and other publications were edited. Teaching
materials based on the outcome of the project were also developed (Sinclair 1987).
The main aim of the Cobuild project was to provide a more realistic description of the
English language. As far as teaching of English is concerned, Sinclair (1997) suggested to present
only real-life examples in the classroom, as invented examples could often be improbable and not
mirror actual usage. According to Sinclair (1997: 34), language teachers should also make use of
their intuition about language and about how words are combined: “co-selection tends to undermine
the notion of word-meaning […]”; hence, it should be placed at the forefront of attention. Rather
than learning and teaching endless lists of vocabulary, space should be allocated for the teaching of
multi-word units (Sinclair 1997: 35). Another advice to teachers who wish to extract teaching
materials from corpora is to ‘teach by meaning’. A traditional dictionary “cheerfully represents
words as often having several discrete meanings, but gives no help whatever as to how in practice
the language user distinguishes among them” (Sinclair 1990: 7). Grammar, on the other hand,
provides “clear-cut rules”, while the nature of language is “to enjoy great flexibility and innovation”
(Sinclair 1990: 6). Relating meaning and form is one possible way to improve the learning process
(Sinclair 1997: 35).
The Cobuild project highlighted the fact that more data could be compiled and analysed with
the aid of new technology. In the following years, numerous dictionaries such as the Oxford
Advanced Learner’s Dictionary of Current English (Hornby 1989) and grammar books such as the
Collins Cobuild English Grammar (Sinclair 1990) (both based on corpus studies) were published.
A further development in the evolution of English language corpora was the compilation of
dynamic, open-ended, modern diachronic corpora, as in the case of unbroken, chronological data
flow of newspaper text. The advent of the Web also contributed to the birth of ‘cyber-corpora’, as
instances of language use were extracted from there and then processed (Renouf 2007a).
The World Wide Web is seen as an important resource for contemporary corpus linguistics,
both as a source of data in itself and as a location of text archives and corpora. In particular, the
‘GRID’ technology – a set of new hardware able to support corpus linguists in storing, processing
and sharing data – allows researchers to create, process and share web-based corpora in a
cooperative way (Renouf 2007a). Although attractive for many researchers (Kilgarriff/Grefenstette
2003, Fletcher 2004, Smarr/Grow 2002), the World Wide Web has some disadvantages: Lew
33
(2009) argues that it is ‘noisy’ (i.e. containing typos) and poorly balanced (containing a high
prevalence of spam and texts about technology and the internet); as a consequence, according to
Lew (2009) the web should not replace existing models of corpus creation and use.
The historical development of English language corpora across the last 25 years is
summarized in the following figure:
⇓1960s onwards: the one-million word (or less) Small Corpus
- standard
- general and specialised
- sampled
- multi-modal2, multi-dimensional3
⇓ 1980s onwards: the multi-million word Large Corpus
- standard
- general and specialised
- sampled
- multi-modal, multi-dimensional
⇓ 1990s onwards: the ‘Modern Diachronic’ Corpus
- dynamic, open-ended, chronological data flow
⇓ 1998 onwards: the Web as corpus
- web texts as source of linguistic information
⇓ 2005 onwards:
- the Grid pathway to distributed corpora
- consolidation of existing corpus types
Figure 3.1: Stages in English language corpus evolution (Renouf 2007a)
2 By multimodal it is here meant a corpus that targets the recording and annotation of different communication
modalities such as speech and written texts.
3 Multi-purpose corpora allow the study of language from different points of view, such as historical variation,
multidimensionality, multi-linguality, etc.
34
The following table (Tab. 3.1) enlists the most important English language general corpora,
which served as a source for scholarly research from the 1960s onward.
Corpus Acronym Language Period Size Reference
Brown University
Standard Corpus of
present-Day American Written American 1 million Kucera and
English BROWN English 1961 words Francis 1967
Lancaster-Oslo- Johansson,
Bergen Corpus of Written British 1 million Leech and
British English LOB English 1961 words Goodluck 1978
Hundt, Sand
Freiburg-Brown Written American 1 million and Skandera
Corpus FROWN English 1991 words 1999
Hundt, Sand
Written British 1 million and Siemund
Freiburg-Lob Corpus FLOB English 1991 words 1998
Written British 1 million
British English 2006 BE06 English 2006 words Baker 2009
British, American
and Australian 450
written and spoken from 1990 million
Bank of English COBUILD data onwards words Sinclair 1987
Written (90%) and
spoken transcripts 100
British National (10%) British million Burnard and
Corpus BNC English 1960-1993 words Aston 1998
Written (90%) and
spoken transcripts 22
American National (10%) American from 1990 million Fillmore et al.
Corpus ANC English onwards words 1998
Tab. 3.1 – Major British and American general corpora (from 1961 onwards)
35
3.2 Corpus-based vs. corpus-driven approaches
A distinction among scholars arose in the 1990s between corpus-based and corpus-driven
approach.
The corpus-based approach starts with a pre-existing theory which is validated using corpus
data, while the corpus-driven approach relies holistically on the text as the sole source of
knowledge, in order to avoid any bias due to the analyst’s assumptions or expectations. In the
corpus-based approach it is also said that corpora are used to ‘expound, test or exemplify theories
and descriptions that were formulated before large corpora became available to inform language
study’ (Tognini-Bonelli 2001: 65). The corpus-driven approach, on the other hand, is committed to
‘the integrity of data as a whole’ (ibid.:84) and ‘theoretical statements are fully consistent with, and
reflect directly, the evidence provided by the corpus’ (ibid.: 85). Corpus-based linguists are
therefore accused by corpus-driven linguists of not being strictly committed to corpus data and to
discard inconvenient evidence by means of annotating a corpus. The corpus-driven linguists, in fact,
have strong objections to corpus annotation. Baker (2011: 85) summarizes the distinction in the
following terms:
“A corpus-based approach generally uses a corpus to investigate predetermined
hypotheses or linguistic categories (often as a supplement to other forms of analysis).
The corpus-driven approach starts from a ‘naïve’ position, using methods like frequency
lists or keywords to drive the analysis in ways that could not be predicted in advance”.
As pointed out by McEnery et al. (2006: 11) the distinction between these two approaches
‘is in reality fuzzy’. The methodology applied in this dissertation will therefore combine elements
of both, following Sinclair’s advice:
“I am advocating that we should trust the text. We should be open to what it may
tell us. We should not impose our ideas on it, except perhaps just to get started. We
should only apply loose and flexible frameworks until we see what the preliminary
results are in order to accommodate the new information that will come from the text.
We should expect that we will encounter unusual phenomena; we should accept that a
large part of our linguistic behaviour is subliminal, and therefore we may find a lot of
surprises. We should search for models that are specifically appropriate to the study of
texts and discourse”. (Sinclair 1992: 25)
36
3.2 General corpora vs. specialised corpora
Depending on the aim of the activity of corpus creation, the corpus can be general, providing
a good selection of the language for a variety of purposes, or specific, focusing on a particular
research goal (Sinclair 1990: 13-14). This distinction is particularly relevant for this study, as the
corpus compiled ad hoc for this study includes only a specific kind of texts, EPAs, and explore a
specific discourse domain, which can be mainly identified in art discourse.
A large general corpus aims to be representative of a whole language; therefore, it usually
amounts to several million words, selected from both written and spoken texts, covering general
language (GL). On the other hand, specialised corpora can comprise between ten thousand and
several hundred thousand words (Bowker/Pearson 2002: 48), covering the language for specific
purposes (LSP). It is common practice to use general reference corpora and special purpose corpora
together for a comparison, in order to determine how the specialised corpus differs from the general
one (Bowker/Pearson 2002: 12).
Specific purpose corpora are used to make observations about a specific research field and
turned out to be very useful in ESP studies, as “a sort of natural development in this field” (Gavioli
2005: 56). One of the first ESP studies based on a specialised corpus was that conducted by Barber
in 1962, which has been already referred to in chapter 2. Barber’s corpus comprised around 23,000
words, based on three research articles from the fields of astronomy, chemistry and engineering.
Corpora specialized in art discourse are very rare; only recently, in 2012, a relevant resource
has been loaded into the online corpus query tool Sketch Engine (Kilgariff et al. 2004): the e-flux
corpus, a web corpus of English art news digests, consisting of 9,538 art press releases issued from
March 1998 to May 2012 and collected from the website e-flux.com, a powerful New York-based
subscriber network for art-world professionals. The e-flux corpus has been the basis of a much
debated article by David Levine and Alix Rule on International Art English (IAE) appeared on the
online journal Triple Canopy4, to be surveyed in chapter 5. Despite the period selection, which
limits the exploration of art press releases to a contemporary perspective, the e-flux corpus is a huge
resource for contemporary international art discourse, totalling about five million words.
If corpora devoted to art discourse are still in their infancy, major collections representative
of media discourse - a further language field related to EPAs - are however available, allowing
scholars to go back in the past and widen the analysis to a diachronic perspective. Unfortunately,
neither EPAs, nor press releases in general, are comprised in these corpora. Therefore, any
4 http://canopycanopycanopy.com/issues/16/contents/international_art_english
37
comparison between the specialized corpus collected for this study – the EPA Diacorpus - and a
reference general corpus has to be carried out on the basis of a wider common ground, which is,
namely, media discourse.
Keeping in mind that “comparison of a specialized corpus with a general reference corpus
helps understanding and interpreting specificity (Gavioli 2005: 67)”, the choice of a reference
corpus for the present study has been directed to the best known corpora devoted to media
discourse, outlined by the following table (Tab. 3.2):
Corpus Acronym Language Period Size Types of Reference
text
Rostock Historical RNC-1 British 1700-2000 600,000 Newspaper Schneider
Newspaper English words articles 2000
Corpus
Zurich English ZEN British 1661-1791 1,6 Newspaper Lehmann et
Newspaper English million articles al. 2006
Corpus words
Time Magazine TIME American 1923-present 100 Journal Davies 2007
Corpus English million articles
words
Uppsala Press UPC British 1994 276,000 Newspaper Axelsson
Corpus English words articles 1998
Reuters Corpus, RCV1 British August 20, 90 million News stories Lewis et al.
Volume 1 English 1996 -August words 2004
19, 1997
Tab. 3.2 - Major British and American corpora specialized in media discourse
The major corpora specialized in media discourse are the Rostock Newspaper Corpus and
the ZEN Corpus.
The Rostock Historical Newspaper Corpus (Schneider 2000) is a collection of English
newspapers from 1700 to the present in 30-year intervals. An average span of 30 years was chosen
because it can be taken to roughly represent one generation, and newspaper language - as well as
language in general - is not likely to change much faster than from one generation to another. The
corpus is made up of three distinct corpus-lines, namely two popular lines (down- and mid-market
38
papers) and one quality line (up-market papers). Each corpus-line and period is represented by a
20,000 word sample (de Haan 1992) taken from two newspapers, yielding a total corpus size of
600,000 words.
The ZEN – Zurich English Newspaper Corpus (Lehmann et al. 2006) covers early English
newspapers published between 1661 and 1791. Including a wide variety of (mainly) London
newspapers, from the early issues of the London Gazette up to the period of the first publication of
The Times, the ZEN Corpus mirrors the extraordinary diversification of newspapers in the 18th
century. It consists of 349 complete newspaper issues, selected in 10-year intervals from 1661
onwards, containing 1,6 million words that were keyed in manually. The Zen Corpus covers most of
the text-classes available (foreign news, home news, shipping news, crime, births, weddings, death
notices, lost and found, proclamations, advertisements). It excludes lists of names, lists of stocks,
and poetry. It is a corpus specifically designed for linguists who want to study the history of the
English language.
Among corpora specialized in media texts the TIME Magazine Corpus, the Uppsala Press
Corpus and the Reuters Corpus are also to be mentioned.
The TIME magazine corpus (Davies 2007) is made up of roughly 100 million words and
275,000 articles taken from the American periodical TIME Magazine (1923 to the present). Freely
available on line, it is the largest diachronic corpus of 20th century American English and due to its
size allows for accurate analysis of linguistic change across the decades.
The Uppsala Press Corpus (UPC) contains material from English up-market as well as mid-
market and down-market newspapers printed in 1994. It consists of about 276.000 words (Axelsson
1998: 226-249).
In 2000 the global news agency Reuters, headquartered in London, made available a large
collection of Reuters news stories for use in research and development of natural language
processing, information retrieval, and machine learning systems. This corpus, known as the Reuters
Corpus, Volume 1, or RCV1, consists of over 800,000 newswire stories that have been manually
coded using three category sets, totalling about 90 million words. However, RCV1 as distributed is
simply “a collection of newswire stories, not a test collection. It includes known errors in category
assignment, provides lists of category descriptions that are not consistent with the categories
assigned to articles, and lacks essential documentation on the intended semantics of category
assignment” (Lewis et al. 2004: 362).
It is also worth noticing that general corpora have a newspaper component. For instance, the
BNC, comprising 100 million words from 1980 to 1993, contains 16 million words from popular
39
magazines and 11 million from newspapers. Newspaper texts are also included in other existing
corpora, such as LOB and Brown and FLOB and Frown.
Two further general corpora can also be of interest for this dissertation, because they can be
used to accurately track and study recent changes in the language: the Corpus of Contemporary
American English (COCA) and the Corpus of Historical American English (COHA). Both were
created by Mark Davies of Brigham Young University.
COCA (Davies 2008) is made up of 450 million words, from 1990 onwards, equally divided
among spoken, fiction, popular magazines, newspapers, and academic texts. It is updated regularly
and is freely available on line. Although balanced in all its components, COCA provides a very
significant media section, with 86 million words from nearly 100 different popular magazines and a
good mix between specific domains (news, health, home and gardening, women, financial,
religion, sports, etc). A few examples are Time, Men’s Health, Good Housekeeping, Cosmopolitan,
Fortune, Christian Century, Sports Illustrated, etc. It also contains 82 million words from ten
newspapers from across the United States, including: USA Today, New York Times, Atlanta Journal
Constitution, San Francisco Chronicle, etc. In most cases, there is a good mix between different
sections of the newspaper, such as local news, opinion, sports, financial, etc.
COHA (Davies 2010) is composed of more than 400 million words of text in more than
100,000 individual texts dating from 1810 to 2009. It embeds the resources of COCA for the period
1990 onwards and in addition provides a series of historical resources from magazines, newspapers,
fiction and non-fiction.
From the 1990s many newspapers have online archives which are searchable. British
national newspapers, in particular, are also available on CD-ROM. The availability of these
materials has allowed research projects such as SiBol 93 and SiBol 05, two corpora named after the
universities of Siena and Bologna working on the project. The first contains around 100 million
words (about 27 million from the Guardian; 34 million from the Telegraph and Sunday Telegraph;
39 million from the Times and Sunday Times), the second contains about 145 million words (41
million from the Guardian; 37 million from the Telegraph and Sunday Telegraph; 67 million from
the Times and Sunday Times). Among recent diachronic studies carried out on SiBol 93 and SiBol
2005 are Partington (2010, 2012), Clark (2010), Duguid (2010) and Marchi (2010).
Given the overview of corpora specialized in media discourse displayed so far, it may be
concluded that the TIME magazine corpus, as well as COCA and COHA, could be ideal reference
corpora for the present work, as they comprise the time period covered by the underlying study
(1950 - 2009), although they are representative only of the language of American media. Moreover,
they allow a compared analysis of linguistic change across the decades.
40
3.3 Exploiting corpora
How can corpora be used in language studies? Following McEnery 2006 (80-121), seven are
the main areas in linguistics which have used corpus data: 1) lexicographic and lexical studies; 2)
grammatical studies, 3) register variation and genre analysis, 4) dialect studies and language
varieties, 5) contrastive and translation studies, 6) diachronic studies and language change, 7)
language learning and teaching, 8) semantics, 9) pragmatics, 10) sociolinguistics, 11) discourse
analysis, 12) stylistics and literary studies and 13) forensic linguistics.
For the present study the most relevant areas of corpus application are those of 1) lexical
studies, 2) genre analysis, 6) diachronic studies and language change, and 11) discourse analysis.
Corpora are invaluable resources for lexicographic and lexical studies due to their machine-
readable nature, which allows to extract typical examples of the usage of a lexical item from a large
body of text in a few seconds. Moreover, corpora provide information on frequency, collocation and
keyness of items (Baker 2006), to be gained with the aid of specific computer software (also known
as corpus analysis tools) applied to computer corpora, i.e. corpora already saved in electronic form.
Collocational meaning plays a very important role in corpus-based lexical studies. As
suggested by Sinclair (2003: 117), “a corpus enables us to see words grouping together to make
special meanings that relate not so much to their dictionary meanings as to the reasons why they
were chosen together. This kind of meaning is called semantic prosody”. Regarded by Louw (2000:
57) as “a form of meaning which is established through the proximity of a consistent series of
collocates”, semantic prosody expresses the speaker/writer attitude and evaluation. The most
prosodies are negative, as in the cases of set in and happen analysed by Sinclair (1987, 1991), while
few of them bear an affectively positive meaning. According to Sinclair (1996, 1998) and Stubbs
(2001c), semantic prosody is a further level if abstraction of the relationship between lexical unites:
collocation (the relationship between a node and individual words), colligation (the relationship
between a node and grammatical categories), semantic preference (semantic sets of collocates) and
semantic prosody (affective meanings of a given node with its typical collocates).
The idea of semantic prosody as “the spreading of connotational colouring beyond single
word boundaries” (Partington 1998: 68) has to be regarded as crucial in the analysis of EPAs, where
specific features of the language are intentionally selected and combined with the aim of triggering
a positive reaction and drawing curiosity in the readers
The corpus-based approach is also well suited for genre studies. As pointed out in chapter 2,
genre analysis as introduced by Swales (1990) and Bhatia (1993, 2004) involves working with
corpora. The convergence of genre studies and corpus linguistics has proven to be insightful
41
especially in reference to typical features of genres, such as the generic structure, but also in
reference to lexis.
According to McEnery et al. 2006 (96), “diachronic study is perhaps one of the few areas
which can be only investigated using corpus data”, in consideration that modern intuitions cannot
fully explain the language used hundred or even tens of years before. Research in this direction can
be carried out only by collecting empirical historical data and compiling properly composed
diachronic corpora. On this issue will be focused the next chapter of the thesis, specifically devoted
to diachronic studies.
Last but not least, corpora (and specialized corpora in particular) can be useful for discourse
analysis, as they allow to combine a quantitative and a qualitative approach to textual analysis. This
is what is often referred to as corpus-assisted discourse studies (CADS). The essential tenets of this
framework have been described, among others, by Stubbs (1996, 2001) and Partington (1998, 2004,
2009). This methodology is characterized by “a constant movement back and forth between data in
the form of concordances, collocations and clusters on the one hand and, on the other, the
contextual information (i.e. the actual texts) retrievable by the software” (Haarman/Lombardo
2009:8).
3.4 Summary
As particularly relevant for the underlying study, in the present chapter corpus linguistics
methodologies have been introduced. Starting from a definition of the term corpus itself, as used in
modern linguistics, the history of this methodology has been briefly reviewed, explaining why
corpus linguists use computers to manipulate and exploit data. Following this is a distinction
between general and specialized corpora: with regard to the latter, an overview of corpora
specialized in the relevant domains of this study - art discourse and media discourse - has been
provided. Finally, the corpus-driven vs. corpus-based debate has been considered.
The following chapter will shift our focus to language change and diachronic studies,
which, in a sense, have always been corpus-based (Bauer 2002:109). This field determines its
reliance on empirical historical data and requires properly composed diachronic corpora, as the one
compiled for this thesis. An overview of this type of language studies will be provided, focusing on
relevant issues and methods.
42
4. Theoretical background: diachronic studies
The present work is based on a diachronic corpus and can be therefore situated among
diachronic corpus-based studies; hence a preliminary introduction of modern diachronic linguistics,
related issues and methods, has necessarily to be provided in order to complete the overview of the
theoretical background underlying this study.
4.1 Modern diachronic linguistics
The idea to create a diachronic corpus was raised in 1982 by Sinclair (Johansson 1982), who
first had a vision of language as a changing flow, which the computer would ‘monitor’ across time.
Hunston (2002:16) defines it as “a corpus of texts from different periods of time […] used to trace
the development of aspects of a language over time”. Similarly, Baker (2006) points out that a
diachronic corpus is “built in order to be representative of a language or language variety over a
particular period of time, making it is possible for researchers to trace linguistics changes within it”;
he also stresses that “discourses are not static, and one way of investigating their development and
change is to use a diachronic corpus” (Baker 2006: 29). Yet, as noted by Hilpert and Gries (2009),
most corpora consist of texts that vary along the parameter of time and even the BNC contains texts
from different decades, so “in the end, what makes a corpus a diachronic corpus is its use for
comparisons over time” (Hilpert/Gries 2009: 400).
When addressing diachronic studies two fundamental theoretical distinction have to be
previously introduced. The first is with regard to the difference between historical and diachronic
(Renouf 2002). Historical linguists use the term diachronic to describe their study in a collective
sense, since as a body of scholars they study the whole realm of text across time, even though in
principle each individual investigation could be focused synchronically in the past. To modern
diachronic linguists, diachronic is used in contrast to synchronic, while diachronic can also mean
‘across time’ to both historical and modern corpus linguists. This second view is also adopted in the
present study.
A second distinction has to be drawn between static or dynamic diachronic corpora. Sample
corpora are static, whereas monitor corpora, that are maintained, are dynamic. The study of
language change may be therefore carried out across a significant period in two parallel finite
corpora, or in an open-ended, unbroken flow of data. In the case of the underlying work, the EPA
Diacorpus, collected ad hoc, was born as a static one, covering a limited time-span (1950 - 2009),
43
but could be easily maintained to become a dynamic one, since contemporary EPAs are published
on line and are easy to retrieve.
The most important static corpus for the diachronic study of English is the Helsinki corpus,
produced by the English Department of the University of Helsinki starting from 1984 and directed
by Matti Rissanen and Ossi Ihalainen (see Kytö/Rissanen 1988; Rissanen/Kytö/Palander-Collin
1993). The corpus contains a diachronic part covering the period from c. 750 to c. 1700 and a
dialect part based on transcripts of interviews with speakers of British rural dialects from the 1970's.
Among static diachronic corpora we can also mention the parallel corpora Brown and
Frown, LOB and FLOB, which allow to compare texts published at thirty-year interval, the RNC-1
and the ZEN (see chapter 3). Beside them is the chronologically-ordered corpus of text samples of
historical English register reaching into the 20th century, known as the ARCHER Corpus
(Universities of Arizona, Southern California, Uppsala and Freiburg): it is a multi-genre corpus of
British and American English covering the period 1650-1999, first constructed by Douglas Biber
and Edward Finegan in the 1990s (see Biber et al. 1994). Eight are the genres of texts comprised by
the Archer: drama, fiction, sermons, journal or diaries, medicine, news, science and letters.
Modern diachronic linguists typically compare text across time-frames of ten to thirty years.
Rissanen (2000) has referred to the longer time-frame as ‘long diachrony’; Kytö, Rudanko and
Smitterberg (2000) have talked of the shorter time-frame in terms of ‘short-term change in
diachrony’; while Mair (1997) has dubbed this shorter time-span ‘brachychrony’.
As pointed out by Renouf (2007a) the period extending from 1900 to today, which is also
relevant for this study, is characterized by a terminological lacuna: the term ‘Late Modern English’
would normally seem appropriate, but may recall something much earlier to the historical linguist.
“In fact, corpus linguists refer to this nameless period as anything from ‘modern’ to ‘present-day’ to
‘current’ to ‘20th century’ and ‘21st century’” (Renouf 2007a: 38). In this study we will address the
collected texts, dating from 1950 to 2009, as belonging to 20th century English.
Jones (1989:279) referred to the Late Modern English period as the ‘Cinderella’ of English
historical linguistic study. According to Beal et al. (2012), the reason for this neglect is that
“scholars could not observe within this period the kind of sweeping structural changes that they
were accustomed to studying (Beal et al. 2012: 201)”. Bloomfield and Newmark (1963) argued that
any changes in the language that had occurred between the eighteenth and the mid 20th century
were “due to matters of style and rhetoric . . . rather than to differences in phonology, grammar or
vocabulary”, going on to claim that “historical or diachronic linguistics, as such, is traditionally less
concerned with such stylistic and rhetorical changes of fashion than with phonological, grammatical
and lexical changes’” (1963: 288). The tendency to disregard anything not viewed as structural
44
continued even in the 1990s: Freeborn (1992: 180) claims that “the linguistic changes that have
taken place from the 18th century to the present day are relatively few”.
According to De Smet (2005) a further reason for neglecting the period beyond the 17th
century is the fact that the most important electronic corpus for the study of the history of English,
the Helsinki Corpus, takes its final cut-off point in 1710: a surprising aspect, in view of the easier
accessibility of data related to the Late Modern English period, which is a very well-documented
one. Nonetheless, once the 21st century dawned, the 19th century was no longer the ‘last’ century,
and even the 20th century could be the subject of historical linguistic study (Mair 2006).
Publications from the 21st century bear witness to a growing interest in the Late Modern English
period as a whole, from the first international conference on Late Modern English organized by
Charles Jones in Edinburgh in 2001 onwards (see Beal et al. 2012). Consequently, more recent
corpora have begun to fill the gap between Early Modern English and the present day: for instance,
the Lampeter Corpus, which covers the transition from Early to Late Modern English (Siemund/
Claridge 1997); the fore-mentioned ARCHER Corpus, which covers the entire period from Late
Modern to Present-Day English (Biber et al. 1994); the Corpus of Late Modern English Prose,
representative of the latter half of the 19th and the beginning of the 20th centuries (Denison 1994);
and more could be added to this list.
Renouf (2007a) enumerates several motivations for the development of modern diachronic
corpora: the awareness that language is a changing phenomenon; the belief that language change
can in principle be observed in corpus data; the curiosity about innovation, variation and change in
grammar and lexis. Moreover, special interest may be placed on neologistic assimilation, lexical
productivity and creativity, and on the structure of the lexicon at the level of hapax legomena. One
may also investigate the power of collocation to identify change in word use, in word sense and in
meaning relationships between words. Given the scope of this work, which is to highlight the
diachronic evolution of EPAs over time linking linguistic change to social and cultural change,
many of these aspects are relevant, if not even all.
4.2 Compiling a diachronic corpus
When compiling a diachronic corpus, the period to be covered is obviously the most
relevant aspect – there must be systematic chronological coverage of the period or of the end-points
of the period to ensure that there is adequate data on which to base studies on language change.
45
Rissanen (1992) has described the difficulties involved in the compilation of a diachronic
corpus to ensure adequate chronological, regional, socio-linguistic and generic coverage. Careful
construction of the corpus is indeed necessary, if reliable comparative data is to be obtained.
The texts contained in the Helsinki Corpus, for instance, are coded according to 25 different
parameters: not only the author’s age and gender, but also the date of the manuscript, whether it is
dialect, whether the text was intended to be private (e.g. a letter), and whether the writer and the
addressee had equal social standing. Because of the coding, computer searches can be thus directed
at predefined parameters.
Rissanen (1992:187) pointed out that although in theory it is possible to focus only on texts
fulfilling particular parameters, e.g. private letters written by middle-aged wives to their husbands
between 1500 and 1640, it is not always possible to code all the parameters with accuracy. It turns
out that:
“By definition, compiling a corpus means and endless series of compromises. Just as a
corpus will never reliably reflect all the language in its varieties and modes of existence,
so, too, parameter coding can never hope to give a complete and valid description of the
samples”. (Rissanenen 1992: 188)
Rissanen has reminded compilers of diachronic corpora of the desirability of adequate
coverage of genre, geographical region, gender, age, sociolinguistic background, and level of
education of the persons who originally spoke or wrote the texts. However, it is often difficult to
achieve such coverage.
As to be explained in chapter 6 of the thesis, devoted to materials and corpus design, in the
case of the diachronic corpus compiled ad hoc for this study it was stipulated to concentrate on
written texts belonging to the same genre (EPAs), evenly issued by Anglo-American museums and
written by a coherent professional community – museum press officers and museum professionals
at large – in a definite time-period, from 1950 to 2009. Moreover, in order to carry out a systematic
diachronic study, EPAs were chosen to represent periods at ten-year intervals.
4.3 Approaches to diachronic change
According to Baker (2011), “corpus approaches to diachronic change are still in their
infancy (and have often only compared two time periods), and it is only recently, with the
46
development of multiple sets of comparable reference corpora, that we can start to trace lexical
change over time” (2011:66). Similarly, Partington (2012) defines modern diachronic corpus-
assisted discourse studies (MD-CADS) as a nascent discipline, characterised by the novelty of
methodologies and topics: “It employs large corpora of a parallel structure and content from
different moments of contemporary time in order to track changes in modern language usage but
also social, cultural and political changes over modern times, as reflected in language” (2012: 51).
Two major approaches to diachronic analysis can be recognized among scholarly linguistic
research: the first focuses on lexical variation over time, and therefore on change at the level of
vocabulary, while the second takes into account the evolution of genres and aims at identifying
change at the level of generic structure. Both approaches will be surveyed in the following sub-
sections.
4.3.1 Lexical variation
Particularly relevant for the first approach is how to identify lexical variation, hence
methodological issues are crucial.
Baker’s studies (2010, 2011) carried out across multiple corpora are particularly relevant in
these terms. Baker (2011) investigated four equal-sized reference corpora of written British English
from 1931, 1961, 1991, and 2006, in search of patterns of vocabulary change and stability. He also
considered several methods to identify variation over time and categorized words as showing sharp
frequency increases, or decreases, or remaining stable. He called the latter “lockwords”, because
they are “relatively static in terms of frequency” (Baker 2011: 66) and “appear to be ‘locked’ in
place” (ibid. 73). Finally, he reported on a number of trends relating to language (specifically
British English) and culture change, including a tendency for written language to become less
verbose, more informal and personal. In a previous study, Baker (2010) carried out a corpus-based
comparison of gendered terms (male and female pronouns, gender-related nouns, and terms of
address) across the same four corpora, finding out that while there had been reductions in some
gender stereotypes, others were maintained: males, in particular, were referred to more often than
females. Both studies show the value of using corpus methods in order to investigate change in the
frequency and context of use of specific items of language over time.
As pointed out by Gabrielatos et al. (2012: 153) a relevant feature of diachronic studies is
“the time-span they cover, which may range from a few years to centuries” and “may vary simply to
suit particular research objectives”. Particularly crucial is also “the number of time points examined
47
within a given time-span”, related to the notion of ‘granularity’ of the analysis (Davies 2010: 448).
Granularity is obtained by dividing the number of sampling points by the time length of the corpus,
expressed in a specified reference time unit, such as years or decades. “The higher the resulting
figure, the higher the granularity of analysis — and the higher the accuracy and usefulness of the
results” (Gabrielatos et al. 2012: 153 ). In the case of the corpus used for the underlying study – the
EPA Diacorpus – we have 6 sampling points – one for each decade, from 1950 to 2009 – to be
divided by a 59 year span, resulting in a granularity of 0.10. To compare studies in this respect,
Leech and Smith (2009) worked on three corpora that were thirty years apart from one another,
covering approximately 65 years and resulting in a granularity of about 0.05, while Millar (2009)
examined a 84 year time-span (1923–2006) using annual intervals — thus creating 84 sampling
points, and a granularity of 1 (i.e. twenty times higher). According to Gabrielatos et al. (2012: 154),
“diachronic corpus studies of low granularity run the risk of leaving unrevealed patterns that may be
worth further investigation”.
Lexical change can be calculated statistically or identified impressionistically, for example,
through the examination of graphical representations. The frequencies of a given form can be
observed at different intervals in order to see whether it became more or less common, or whether it
remained relatively stable over time. Yet, it is not so easy to distinguish between a real trend and an
accidental fluctuation in the data. Hilpert and Gries (2009: 386) claim that “there are insights to be
gained from exploratory statistical techniques, which may reveal phenomena that are not observable
through mere eyeballing of frequency data”. They refer in particular to bottom-up and data-driven
approaches, involving the use of rank-order correlations or more sophisticated cluster analysis.
Hilpert and Gries (2009) also point out the lack of agreed upon standards in the interpretation of
diachronic variation and the need for analytical tools to be shared by scholars. As more diachronic
studies are carried out, there is therefore an urge for effective measures to identify change and
stability over time.
The measure adopted in the present study to quantify the strength of lexical variation is the
CV (coefficient of variance), as proposed by Paul Baker (2010, 2011), to be extensively explained
in chapter 7 of this thesis.
4.3.2 Structural variation
As pointed out by Berkenkotter (2008a), genre is a cultural construct used to organize
communication in society, hence it is crucial to study its evolutionary dynamics in order to get at a
better understanding of genre as such.
48
In view of this tenet, a fruitful area of diachronic linguistics research is that focused on the
rapid diversification and evolutions of textual genres produced by sweeping changes in
communicative practices, patterns and technologies: a phenomenon of ‘generification’, to use John
Swales’ definition (2004: 4-6), which involves the evolution of existing genres, their diversification
into a variety of sub-genres, and the emergence of totally new ones” (Garzone 2012: 21).
Aiming at systematizing the main factors that have contributed to determining the rapid
process of genre change, Garzone (2012: 21–40) identifies four change-inducing factors: (1)
interdiscursivity, i.e. the appropriation of semiotic resources across different professional genres,
practices and cultures (Bhatia 2010), which determines forms of contamination; (2) imposition of
conventions in certain professional areas, such as, for instance, the gatekeeping action exerted by
international journals on the genre of the scientific research article; (3) broad cultural, ethical and
societal changes, which have determined the emergence of new genres, such as, for instance, Social
Responsibility Reports; (4) spread of new technologies. The latter factor is perceived by Garzone
(2012) as the most powerful in determining change: as a matter of fact, Computer- and Web-
Mediated-Communication has revolutionised our basic notions about communication, to the point
that while “for many genres now there exists a multimodal ‘double’ resulting from their migration
to the web”, many others are “native to the web and have unprecedented peculiarities in terms of
mode of discourse” (Garzone 2012: 34).
The Hypermedia Computer-Mediated Environment (HCME: cf. Hoffman/Novak 1996) is
characterised by an inherent multimodality, as it gives simultaneous access to the use of a number
of technologies, images, sounds, animation, films, which can be combined. Moreover, genres
comprised under the label of HCME can be accessed simultaneously by a global audience.
According to Garzone (2012) the property of HCME that has had the deepest impact on genre
change is hypertextuality, which is the basic characteristic of Web texts. Among its consequences
are the fragmentation of text into graphically separated sections and the activation of different
reading modes, as the reader can navigate the site and actively construct his/her own reading path
(Askehave and Ellerup Nielsen 2004, 2005). Further, more recent web applications involve users in
a dynamic participation, as that provided by new web genres such as weblogs and social networks.
Genre analysts interested in the diachronic evolution of genres need therefore to take into
account all these new notions and criteria when exploring the pervasive impact that new
technologies have had on communication in the contemporary world.
With regard to the present study, the most relevant change-inducing factors are indeed (1)
interdiscursivity, as EPAs keep a middle ground among media, art and promotional discourses; (2)
conventions, as EPAs are shaped by the relevant professional communities involved in their use, i.e.
49
art journalists and museum professionals; and (4) spread of new technologies, as EPAs are now
published also online and can benefit from their e-dimension in terms of spread. However,
multimodality, hypertextuality and interactivity are less involved in the analysis of EPAs carried out
in this thesis, since documents were accessed in a ‘frozen’ format, i.e. on paper or PDF, an
electronic format which provides a series of pages in a sequence and exactly reproduces the aspect
of a printed – and therefore static – document (see Garzone 2012: 34-35).
4.4 Diachronic studies applied to specialized discourse
Although diachronic studies can increase our understanding of specialized languages, those
in the area of languages for specific purposes are still rare, maybe because they require “the kind of
multifaceted analysis” (Dossena/Fitzmaurice 2006: 9) which takes into account many different
levels, from linguistic investigation to observation of professional practices, socio-cultural features,
semantic and pragmatic values.
The present literature survey will take into account diachronic studies related to the relevant
domains of the underlying study, and namely media and art discourse.
Modern diachronic studies especially devoted to the latter are hard to be found: among them
we could barely mention Paltridge et al. (2012), focused on the macrostructures of doctoral theses
in the visual and performing arts, although the relevant discourse domain here is academic rather
than art writing. Thus, this study has a point of interest because the conclusion is that innovation in
the genre of doctoral theses in the visual arts is mostly associated with breaking the rules of
conventional doctoral writing practices and typical move structure, so that a certain degree of
creativity seems to characterize even a well consolidated and conventional genre like PhD theses,
when artistic subjects are involved.
Diachronic studies in the field of media discourse are relatively more widespread.
Nonetheless, the only diachronic linguistic analysis of press releases that I am aware of is Resche
(2003), on the evolution of press releases issued by the US Federal Reserve, which is however
written in the perspective of English for the economics. Resche (2003) argues for the stability of
this genre over time but highlights an increasing urge for transparency from 2000 onward, as a
response to a need of disambiguation expressed by journalists and, indirectly, by the lay public,
which is however challenged by an overly complex language typical of the genre.
Among scholars involved in modern diachrony applied to media discourse are Hundt and
Mair (1999), who, in their tracking of changes in newspaper prose between 1960 and 1990, noted a
greater use of contractions, and first- and second-person pronouns, where these oral features were
50
adopted in an attempt to appeal to a wider reading audience. Partington (2010 ed., 2012) and
Duguid (2010) have also been working on British broadsheet newspapers, as collected in the SiBol
1993 and SiBol 2005 corpora. Duguid (2010) has pointed out that the language of newspapers has
changed over time in terms of an increasingly more conversational and informal style, along with a
notable increase in a particular kind of evaluative and promotional language, as a result of a
proportional increase in soft news, supplements and reviews. Duguid (2010) also highlighted an
increasing lack of specificity in the language of the news and a shift towards a style of writing
which could be described as ‘vague’.
Among studies on English 20th century media discourse are also Bauer (1994) and (Westin)
2002, both focused on newspaper editorials, while Renouf (2007b) has dealt with lexical coinages
used by English newspapers journalists between 1989 and 2005.
Comparing the construction of relative clauses between two newspapers, The Times and The
Daily Mail, Bauer (1994) noted that in the latter there are many more human antecedents, being the
most obvious reason that people were discussed more in The Daily Mail than in The Times. He also
argues that English is changing for the better, while “many lay people writing about language
change appear to assume that [...] change is decay, is going to the dogs” (Bauer 1994: 172).
Among Westin’s findings (2002) related to the analysis of the editorials of three London
quality papers – The Times, The Daily Telegraph and The Guardian – two points stand out: the
tendency towards greater stylistic informality and the trend towards increased information density
coupled with more precise lexical choice. Also noticeable, but less central is the decrease of
narrative elements in the editorials. More particularly, Westin (2002) related the decreasing
frequency of vagueness markers, such as private verbs (think, believe, etc.) and adverbial amplifiers
(absolutely, enormously, etc.), to the growth of lexical precision and information density. Besides,
the vocabulary used by editorials became more varied and specific, the sentences became shorter
and the instances of subordination fewer: a result which Westin (2002) puts in relation to the
authors’ increasing striving for reader-friendliness or of their striving for information density.
Within her study of selected neologisms appeared in English broadsheet newspapers,
Renouf’s (2007b) focused on the notion of lexical productivity and creativity in journalism:
“employed for the purposes of achieving certain stylistic effects”, they can be also used to convey
“a sense of authorial learnedness, sophistication, distancing and so on” (ibi. 7-8). She also states
that “vogue terms, fore-grounded by real-world events for whatever reasons, will be in the front line
for exploitation” (ibi. 8). Also central is the idea that words have a life-cycle consisting of “birth or
re-birth”, peaks, upward and downward paths, until they reach a stable level of use (ibi. 23).
Further, Renouf (ibi.23) observes that “not all words are equally destined for success”, as their
51
fortunes may be inhibited by several factors; this is the case, for instance, of terms borrowed
metaphorically from scientific domains, foreign or classical terms, and, to a broader extent,
ambiguous terms.
Widening the perspective to historical discourse analysis, an useful account of the language
of English journalism and its development from the seventeenth century to the present day is
offered by Conboy 2010, who focuses especially on the emerging of a “tabloid culture” in the
twentieth century, while Jucker 2005 shows how technological innovations led to language change
at the discourse level in the past century, with specific regard to the disintegration of the
prototypical format of news-reporting – the traditional inverted pyramid – in shorter units (jigsaw-
journalism).
As already pointed out for studies on Early Modern English in general, also those on media
discourse related to that period are more frequent. Fries (2006), for instance, explored the genre of
obituaries in the ZEN corpus (covering early English newspapers published between 1661 and
1791); Brownlees (2006) and Jucker (2009) investigated newspapers, pamphlets and scientific
writings in Early Modern Britain. Changes in news form, structure and content occurred through the
centuries and still ongoing were also investigated by Facchinetti et al. (2012): Brownlees (in
Facchinetti et al. 2012: 5-48) focuses on the first steps of news reporting, between 1620, when
pamphlets began to be regularly published, and 1665, when the first England’s newspaper, The
Oxford Gazette, was founded; Fries (ibid. 49-90) covers the following century (1665-1675), which
saw an unprecedented rise in news publications in Great Britain; Bös (ibid. 91-144) analysed the
period 1760-1960, when social and economic changes, as well as technological innovations
contributed to making the news writing landscape more complex, while Facchinetti (ibid. 145-196)
focuses on the last fifty years of news reporting, from the 1960s up to the present time, that sees
mainstream news reporting challenged by social networks.
The results highlighted by the studies above mentioned, and in particular by Westin (2002)
and Renouf (2007b), are worthy of a comparison with those to be provided by the present thesis.
52
4.5 Summary
In this chapter the notion of modern diachronic linguistics has been introduced, surveying
the most relevant corpora that have been compiled so far, allowing scholars to carry out linguistic
diachronic studies. Next, two major approaches adopted by scholars engaged in diachronic studies
have been briefly outlined: on the one hand, the analysis can focus on change at the level of
vocabulary; on the other, a diachronic perspective may be adopted in exploring the historical
evolution of genres and therefore change at the level of structure. Eventually, anticipating the topic
of the following chapter, which is devoted to the relevant discourse domains of the present study, a
survey of diachronic studies devoted to specialized discourse has been provided.
53
5. Relevant domains: media, promotional and art discourse
As previously mentioned in chapter 1, EPAs can be interpreted as a particular type of press
releases, or even as a sub-genre within the main category of press releases. It has also been pointed
out that press releases show a typical mix of informative and promotional purposes (Jacobs 1999,
Catenaccio 2008), which makes them prime examples of what Bhatia (2004: 90) and Fairclough
(1992:207) call ‘hybrid genres’, resulted from a process of colonization and invasion of integrity of
one genre by another. In view of this complexity, Jacobs (1999a) suggests that the background of
any study on press releases should necessarily be open to a broad research area (1999a: 1).
Following the ESP approach to genre and assuming therefore that communicative purpose is
a genre determinant, EPAs have to be considered as the result of the combination of different
discourse types: on the one hand, media discourse, which is mainly informative, on the other
promotional discourse, which is characterized by a persuasive intent. Moreover, for their content
specifically related to art in its many aspects, EPAs involve a third domain, art discourse, whose
main communicative purpose is descriptive and evaluative.
An attempt to graphically represent the collocation of EPAs among these different, yet
overlapping fields, is provided by figure 5.1 below. Each relevant domain – media discourse,
promotional discourse and art discourse – will be outlined and dealt in turn in the following
sections.
Media Discourse
Promotional Discourse
Press Releases
Advertisement
Art reviews Exhibition Press
Advertorials
Announcements
Art Discourse Museum Texts
Catalogue Essays Museum Websites
Figure 5.1 – Collocation of EPAs among relevant discourse domains and related genres
54
5.1 Media discourse
Media (or news) discourse, to be intended in the broadest sense of all statements produced
by the media professional community, is one of the most prominent research area in linguistics and
in discourse analysis. Several different approaches and frameworks for analyzing news discourse
have developed over the years enabling media researchers to follow specific directions. In her study
on evaluation in news discourse, Bednarek (2006: 13-14) provides a useful summary of the main
research directions emerged so far, which can be used as a means for orientation. Eight major
approaches to media language are outlined:
- (a) the critical approach. The importance of the context, the social and historical settings of
the text, and the intertextual/ interdiscursive dimension are emphasized. The notions of
ideology, power, hierarchy, and gender, together with sociological variables, are all seen as
relevant for an interpretation or explanation of text. Gender issues, issues of racism, media
discourses, political discourses, organizational discourses, or dimensions of identity research
are very prominent (e.g. Hodge 1979, Trew 1979, Fairclough 1988, 1995a, 1995b, Fowler
1991, Talbot 1995, van Dijk 1988a, 1988b, White 1998, Weiss/Wodak 2003, Caldas-
Coulthard 2003, Koller 2004, Gabrielatos/Baker 2008, Conboy 2013).
- (b) the narrative/pragmatic/stylistic approach. Concerned with the structure and language of
news discourse, it involves pragmatic analyses, discussions of perspective, genre status,
style and register (e.g. Crystal/Davy 1969, Verschueren 1985, Carter 1988, Bell 1991,
Almeida 1992, Ljiung 1997, White 1997, 1998, Jacobs 1999a, Ungerer 2004, Ketteman
2013).
- (c) the corpus-based approach. Studies on media discourse are carried out with the aid of
corpora (e.g. Short et al. 1999, Schneider, K. 1999, Schneider, D. 1999, Schneider, K. 2000,
Minugh 2000, Ljung 2002, Ni 2003, Biber 2003, Clark 2007).
- (d) the practice-focused approach. It focuses on news-making practices (e.g. Bell 1991,
Paganoni 2009, Landert/Jucker 2011).
- (e) the diachronic approach. Studies in this direction deal with the historical evolution of
media discourse (see chapter 4 of this thesis for references).
- (f) the socio-linguistic approach. The context and in particular the social background of
news discourse are investigated (e.g. Bell 1991, Jucker 1992, Cotter 2010).
- (g) the cognitive approach: analyses of the relations between cognitive processes, conceptual
metaphor, social meaning, and discourse (e.g van Dijk 1988a, 1988b, Schwarz-Friesel/
Kromminga 2013).
55
- (h) the conversationalist approach. The methods of conversation analysis are adapted to
research on media discourse (e.g. Clayman 1990, Greatbatch 1998, Clayman/Heritage 2002,
Heritage/Clayman 2010, Patrona 2012).
The present study combines many of these approaches: the diachronic and the corpus-based
approaches are the most evident, as the analysis is carried out on a historical corpus of EPAs, but
also the pragmatic and the socio-linguistic approaches are involved, since the aim of this work is to
relate the historical evolution of the genre to its professional, cultural and social context. In
particular, changes at the level of lexico-grammar and structure of EPAs are interpreted as a
reflection of greater changes at a macro level over the last century: in particular, the advent of new
technologies and media, such as the World Wide Web, and the transformation of museums into
enterprises.
5.1.1 Press releases
In comparison with the great amount of studies on the language of newspapers, press
releases received relatively small attention. Moreover, press releases have become an issue in the
domain of linguistics only recently, being a matter of major interest mostly to public relations
practitioners. A wide range of books on how to write the perfect press release is available, with
best-sellers like Aaronson, Spetner, Ames 1998, Fletcher 2004 or McIntyre and Fife 2008.
With regard to linguistics, press releases analysts focused, on the one hand, on the generic
features of press releases (Jacobs 1999a, 1999b; McLaren/Gurâu 2005) and, on the other, on the
professional practices surrounding their production (Sleurs, Jacobs, van Waes 2003; Sleurs/Jacobs
2005) and their subsequent use in news reports (Walters/Walters/Starr 1994; Walters/Walters 1992;
Lenaerts 2002; Catenaccio 2006; Pander Maat 2007).
Although there is common agreement between scholars on their belonging to media
discourse (Bell 1991), the genre status of press releases seems to be under constant negotiation.
Studies in this field show three main trends: a first group of researchers (e.g. Frandsen et al., 1997;
Jacobs, 1999a) make claims about typicality in press releases and consider them as belonging to a
genre per se, despite variation in communicative purposes; a second group, drawing on ESP genre
theory and considering the notion of communicative purpose as one of the main criteria used to
determine genre membership, tend to define press releases as belonging to a hybrid genre, due to
56
their multiple communicative purposes (Fairclough 1995; White 1997; Catenaccio 2008); a third
line of research denies the genre status of press releases and suggests to analyse them at a broader
level, as media channels (Lassen 2006).
Bell (1991: 57) mentions press releases in his classification of input sources for news: (1)
Interviews, either face to face or by telephone; (2) Public addresses; (3) Press conferences; (4)
Written text of spoken addresses; (5) Organizationally produced documents of many kinds: reports,
surveys, letters, findings, agendas, minutes, proceedings, research papers, etc; (6) Press releases; (7)
Prior stories on a topic, either from own or other media; (8) News agency copy, and, eventually, (9)
the journalist’s notes from all above inputs, especially the spoken ones. The importance of press
releases is also introduced by Bell when he explains a crucial part of news making:
“Many stories ostensibly written by local journalists, and even bylined to them, consist
largely of material they have rewritten (often only lightly) from press releases issued by
news making organizations. A large proportion of news which appears to be produced
by local reporters is primarily the work of press officers working for companies,
government departments or other organizations”. (Bell 1991: 17)
Moreover, Bell (1991) points out that “journalists favour written sources which are already
prefabricated in an appropriate news style and therefore require the minimum of reworking”, and
therefore “a well-written press release about something with news value has a high chance of being
picked up and published largely untouched” (Bell 1991: 58). This peculiar aspect was explored in-
depth by Jacobs in his influential work “Preformulating the news” (1999a). According to Jacobs
(1999a: xi) ‘the only raison d’être of the Press Release is to be retold [. . .] as accurately as possible,
preferably even verbatim, in news reporting’. Jacobs (1999a) has also identified three main features
of the genre: (a) third person self-reference; (b) use of third-person semiperformatives, and (c) use
of self-quotation (or pseudo-quotation). As regards self-reference (a), Jacobs points out that there
are hardly any first person pronouns (we, etc). Instead he finds that “self-referencing is almost
exclusively realized in the third person, in particular through the use of the organization’s proper
name” (1999b: 220). According to Jacobs, through third person self-reference writers of press
releases switch out of their own perspective and move towards that of the journalists, who are
expected to copy the press releases into their own news reporting. Jacobs (e.g. 1999a) also identifies
what he calls semi-performatives (b) in press releases such as announce or remark statements,
linking them to preformulation: “the explicit semi-performative utterances in extracts from press
57
releases… can easily be retold verbatim by journalists in their own news reporting” (1999a: 251)
and as such they serve a preformulating function. In his examination of self-quotation (c), Jacobs
notes that press releases are heavily characterised by instances of what Bell (1991) calls “pseudo-
direct speech”, where the words “were almost certainly not verbalised by the named source, [ but]
written by a press officer and merely approved by the source (sometimes not even that)” (Bell 1991:
60). Self-quotation is claimed to fulfill many of the same functions as third-person self-reference,
including preformulation: “it appears as if the writer of the press release is switching out of his or
her own perspective and takes that of the journalists, who are expected to retell the press release in
their own news reporting” (Jacobs 1999a: 183). Self-quotation also allows PR writers to distance
themselves from what is being reported. As Goffman puts it, “[i]nstead of stating a view outright,
the individual tends to attribute it to a character who happens to be himself, but one he has been
careful to withdraw from in one regard or another” (1974: 551). Thus self-quotation also serves to
make press releases look neutral – it “serves to anticipate the typical objectivity requirements of
news reporting” (Jacobs 1999a: 195) – and reliable – “quotation marks are traditionally assumed to
signal verbatim reporting… as a result, they lend an air of reliability to the report” (Jacobs 1999a:
196).
Scholars who consider press releases as a genre per se also underline the issue of a common
move-structure. For instance, Frandsen et al. 1997 suggested the following scheme to be applied to
press releases in general:
- Genre label
- Summary of central information
- Elaboration of central information
- Contact person/address
(Frandsen et al. 1997)
According to Frandsen, therefore, the press release is to be seen as a super-ordinate genre
with a number of sub-genres.
McLaren and Gurâu (2005) identified as well a typical move-structure for corporate press
releases, basing their analysis on a corpus of press releases issued by companies in the UK
biotechnology sector, which is illustrated below:
- Announcement
- Elaboration
58
- Comments (CEO)
- Contact details
- Editor’s note
( McLaren/Gurâu 2005: 16)
So far, we presented the first analytical approach, insisting on the main idea of press releases
as a pure, quite monolithic genre. The second approach focuses on the content and the
communicative purpose(s) of press releases, interpreted as a mix of informative and promotional,
which makes them prime examples of what have been called “hybrid genres” (cfr. Bhatia 2004: 90;
Fairclough 1992: 207) – i.e. genres which are the result of the blurring of boundaries between
discourses, and which appear to be especially prominent in – though by no means limited to – the
domain of contemporary media” (Catenaccio 2008: 11). Lassen (2006) took this position even
further, arguing that the press release cannot be considered a genre because it does not have a
univocally identifiable communicative purpose: "the press release is not a genre, but rather a media-
channel […], used as a vehicle to carry a variety of rhetorical objectives, and hence a variety of
genres" (2006: 506).
The present thesis shares the view of press releases as a peculiar mix of informative and
promotional. The topic will be dealt more in-depth in section 5.2, devoted to promotional discourse.
However, before moving to the domain of promotional discourse, a further relevant feature worth of
investigation in press releases has to briefly outlined in the next sub-section (5.1.2), i.e. the use of
narrative.
5.1.2 Narrative in press releases
According to Bell (1991: 100) “journalists do not write articles. They write stories” (1991:
100). By using the word ‘stories’, Bell introduces a fundamental feature of the language of the
news, which involves press releases as well: narrative.
According to Conboy (2013), by the end of nineteenth century there was a shift in news
values from a relating of information about the world in terms of facts to a concentration on the
story as the basic unit of the news. This was a consequence of the demands of mass readerships and
advertisers, urging for more attractive and entertaining contents in the newspapers. Indeed, stories
59
are most wanted items for media people and in a similar context press releases with a narrative
potential are more bound to be used and retold by journalists in their own news reporting, so that
narrative is a relevant aspect worth of investigation in this genre too.
As pointed out by Conboy (2103), the different layers which build to form a narrative can be
directly applied to the narratives of the news. These layers have been explained, among others, by
Toolan (1988) and Bal (1997).
According to Toolan (1988: 1-12) the basic components of a story are events, settings and
characters, which could be seen as the answer to the classic journalist’s questions, Who? What?
How? Why? When? Moreover, “narrative typically is a recounting of things spatiotemporally
distant” (1988: 2); it is characterized by a certain degree of constructedness and prefabrication; it
seems to have a ‘trajectory’, with some sort of development and even a resolution, or conclusion; it
must have a teller and makes use of a language feature called ‘displacement’, often referring to
things that are removed, in space or time, from the reader.
Similarly, for Bal (1997) a narrative requires a ‘fabula’, i.e. the material for a story in
chronological or logical sequence; then there comes the arrangement of the ‘fabula’ into an order
which will provide the necessary emphasis and context for a proper development of characters and
situations, for instance the ‘inverted triangle’ of the traditional hard news story; finally, further
generic choices can be added to the ‘fabula’, in order to enrich the story with cultural associations
and preferences.
Two variants of narrative, reported by Conboy (2013: 143), have been highlighted by
Gripsrud (1992) and Langer (1998) as key-components of the news today: (1) the ‘melodrama’, a
narrative based on the differences between good and evil, presented in a variety of intense
characters and extreme situations marked in terms of shock, disgrace and morality; (2) the ‘other
news’, where drama is drawn from the lives of ordinary people, offering micro-narrative cases
through their own stories of daily survival. In both cases, the link with the readers may be expressed
through an emotional language and condensed in brief, effective headlines.
Aspects of narrative combined with emotional language seem particularly worth of
examination also in the context of EPAs, since there is already evidence of this combination in the
contemporary instances of the genre (Lazzeretti/Bondi 2012).
60
5.2 Promotional discourse
At the highest level of generalization, Bhatia (2004: 60) defines promotional discourse as “a
constellation of several closely related genres with an overlapping communicative purpose of
promoting a product or service to a potential customer”. At a first level, Bhatia (2004: 60) identifies
some common examples, such as advertisements, promotional letters, book blurbs, job application
letters and sales promotion letters, explicitly characterized by a common promotional purpose. At a
second level, he further identifies a number of other genres, which do not promote necessarily a
product or service, but rather an idea or a particular issue: fundraising letters, travel brochures, grant
proposals, public campaigns, book reviews, film reviews, company reports, annual reports,
company brochures, advertorials, and, more relevantly for this study, press releases. Although they
may not appear to be advertisements tout court, these hybrid genres carry as well a strong
promotional concern and can be seen as members of larger genre colonies. Bhatia highlights the
dynamism of these hybrid genres also in a diachronic view, pointing out that they can change over
time, “further develop or even become obsolete because of lack of use” (2004: 62).
Advertising, as promotional activity par excellence, is based on product appraisal and on the
subtle use of description and evaluation. Keeping in mind, as a general premise, that any move-
structure has to be interpreted in a flexible way and that the presence and order of moves and steps
may vary according to the different contexts, Bhatia describes the typical rhetorical structure of
promotional genres as following:
1. Headlines (for reader attraction)
2. Targeting the market
3. Justifying the product or service
-by indicating the importance or need of the product or service
and/or
-by establishing a niche
4.Detailing the product or service
-by identifying the product or service
-by describing the product or service
-by indicating the value of the product or service
5.Establishing credentials
6.Celebrity or typical user endorsement
7.Offering incentives
61
8.Using pressure tactics
9.Soliciting response
(Bhatia 2004: 65)
Bhatia also explains that promotional purposes may be identified in academic and
professional genres, as a consequence of the phenomenon of mixing ‘private intentions’ with
‘socially recognized communicative purposes’ (Bhatia 2004: 73): for instance, a promotional input
may appear in academic introductions, in terms of positive description and evaluation of books or
articles, or even in the attempt of establishing credentials and soliciting response, moves typical of
advertisements’ macrostructure. From a diachronic perspective, Bhatia (2004: 76ff) points out that
this mixing tendency, although more visible in recent times, was not completely absent from
academic and professional discourse some 50 years ago. It has become more visible in the last few
decades because of several factors: the increasing use of multimedia, the explosion of information
technology, the multi-disciplinary approach to work, the increasing competitiveness in professional
environments, and “the overwhelming compulsive nature of promotional and advertising activities”
(Bhatia 1995:1).
In Bhatia’s view, promotional genres have great influence on the other genres – academic
and professional -, as their power of colonization is particularly strong. This phenomenon was and
is still being triggered by new technologies, which encourage a creative use of language and a new
interpretation of conventional forms of discourse: “Advertising has turned the process of writing
into an art form, where writers constantly compete for attention not only by innovative use of
language but also by the creative use of traditional expressions and clichés, which are often shunned
by good writers in other forms of discourse” (Bhatia 2004: 84).
Expert members of professional discourse communities do not limit themselves to mix
socially accepted communicative purposes form different genres creating hybrid (both mixed and
embedded) forms; they may also bend genres in a more conflicting way by appropriating generic
resources - lexico-grammatical, rhetorical, discoursal - from a specific genre for the construction of
another. According to Bhatia this ‘invasion of territorial integrity’ is very common (2004: 87) and
has in advertising discourse its predominant instrument. A number of professional genres have been
invaded this way, including academic, corporate, political and journalistic genres, as the following
figure (5.2) shows:
62
Figure 5.2 – Colonization of academic, professional and other institutionalized genres
(Bhatia 2004: 90)
As can be seen in the diagram, the genre of press release, which is particularly relevant for
this study, is comprised in the colony of genres invaded by promotional discourse. Its position is
between explicitly promotional genres, such as advertisements, and more hybrid genres shaped by
partial appropriation of promotional purposes. Although Bhatia (2004: 90) relates press releases to
socio-political and diplomatic contexts, rather than to journalistic environment, as “persuasive
though not in the sense of marketing”, he also points out that they are “designed to serve
informative purposes” but “invariably focus only on positive aspects and incorporate persuasive and
sometimes even promotional elements” (Bhatia 2004: 90). From the point of view of professional
discourse, the informational function of press releases can be seen in conflict with the promotional
function: Jacobs (1999a:307) draws attention in particular to the ‘unpaid publicity’ that press
releases seem to convey, keeping a middle ground between advertising and news reporting. As a
matter of fact, the mixing of promotional and informative features characterizes press releases since
their first origin (Catenaccio 2008: 11). ‘Promotional elements’ do not necessarily harm subsequent
news report and may even reinforce the press release itself: as suggested by Pander Maat, “strong
positive statements can make the release look more newsworthy, and some journalists may think
63
that a positive tone attracts readers. … thus, promotional press releases may well succeed in
generating free publicity” (Pander Maat 2007: 63).
Not to be confused with press releases is another promotional genre which has been recently
introduced and has to do with media and news environment in general: a hybrid between
advertisement and editorial, commonly referred to as ‘advertorial’. Advertorials are “blocks of paid-
for, commercial message, featuring any object or objects that simulates the editorial content of a
publication in terms of design/structure, visual/verbal content, and/or context in which it appears”
(Cameron/Ju-Pak 2000: 66-67). For their fuzzy nature, blurring between informative and
promotional contents, advertorials may create confusion among readers who think that they are part
of the publication’s editorial content (Cameron et al. 1994). Advertorials are however accepted
because advertisers are convinced that they are more effective than traditional advertisements and,
despite their appearance of news, readers can recognize them by their external characteristics.
The textual genre addressed by the present study, EPAs, is heavily characterized by
promotional features. Previous investigation on this peculiar type of press release (Lazzeretti 2010,
Lazzeretti/Bondi 2012) showed that promotional purpose plays a very significant role in terms of
lexico-grammar and structure. EPAs aim at captivating the attention of media people in order to
guarantee press coverage of the exhibitions, and, thank to their e-dimension, at attracting online
audience and increasing the number of potential visitors. With regard to language, these
communicative purposes are pursued through evaluative language identifying ad hoc semantic
categories: the novelty of the featured events, the quality, as well as the quantity of works on view,
the exclusiveness of the occasion, the newsworthiness of the event in general. Moreover, in terms of
macro-structure, the analysis of EPAs shows at least three peculiar moves – stating credits,
promoting the catalogue, citing collateral events – functional to promotional purposes and absent
from common formats already identified for the genre of press release (Frandsen et al. 1997,
McLaren/Gurâu 2005).
So far we presented two discourse domains relevant for this study, media discourse and
promotional discourse, respectively linked with the informative and promotional purposes. Next we
will move to art discourse, which has to be taken into account as well in order to provide a complete
picture of EPAs, press releases especially related to art and its manifestations.
64
5.3 Art discourse
For their content specifically devoted to art exhibitions, EPAs can be put in relation not only
to media and promotional discourses, but also to art discourse. In announcing up-coming
exhibitions, EPAs indulge in detailed descriptions of the artworks to be exhibited, techniques
involved, and exhibiting space design. The featured artists are presented through their biography
and the mention of their most important works, so as the artistic movements relevant for the
exhibition are explained. Moreover, the professional environment to which EPAs belong is deeply
permeated by art discourse: as previously mentioned in the introduction of this thesis, EPAs are
“texts in museums” (Ravelli 2006:2), i.e. tools of communication between the institutions and their
audiences, and are especially written for art journalists in charge of reviews and criticism.
As a result, EPAs can be considered prime examples of what scholars have been
alternatively calling ‘artwriting’ (Carrier 1987), ‘artspeak’ (Atkins 1990, Harris 2003), ‘art talk’ and
‘artworld discourse’ (Irvine 2004-2009).
As is so often the case for concepts that stand for complex phenomena, the notion of art
discourse is essentially fuzzy and the plurality of terminology mirrors the difficulty in defining it.
Harris (2003) adopted the term ‘artspeak’, previously popularized by the art historian Robert Atkins
(Atkins 1990), “not simply to include the buzzwords used by critics in certain sectors of the art
world, but to cover the whole range of discourse about works of art and their appreciation (or
disparagement)” (Harris 2003: xii). The term goes also beyond what David Carrier called
‘artwriting’, which was restricted to “texts by both art critics and art historians” (Carrier 1987: 141).
Irvine (2004-2009) prefers the term ‘artworld discourse’, which he defines as a “distributed
network system of ways of talking” about art, comprising “ the various vocabularies, arguments,
professional fields, and institutionalized contexts for making statements”. Aim of the multiple
discourses employed within the artworld is to describe, talk and argue about art objects and to
identify ‘art’ in itself. As Irvine (2004-2009) puts it, artworld discourse is “a function of the
artworld’s role in defining the cultural category of art and maintaining the art/non-art binary”.
Artworld discourse, to be considered as the totality of discourses used to construct art, involves
several varieties highly professionalized and rule-governed: for instance, journalistic art writing
follows the rules of journalism and popular media, and excludes theoretical discourses and the
terminology of academic theory to maintain the illusion of "art" as being accessible and still
transparent to the middle class. Each variety of art discourse is also embedded in institutions that
authorize and transmit them: schools, the press and the sectors of the publishing and media industry,
museums, galleries and commercial market contexts. Irvine’s network of artworld discourse
comprises: a) mainstream press, b) blogs and quoted popular discourse, c) independent weeklies
65
and websites, d) weekly magazines that include art ‘coverage’, e) art magazines and monthly art
press (and their websites), f) advertising in the magazines, press, and websites, g) curatorial
discourse in museum publications, catalogues, and exhibition texts, h) gallery publications,
catalogs, press releases, j) academic and scholarly books and articles.
The great variety of genres comprised under the label of art discourse is also stressed by
Nobili (2003:10): “Il discorso dell’arte […] è molto ricco e variegato: si parte dai testi critici,
cataloghi di musei, riviste d’arte, articoli nei quotidiani, tavole esplictaive o didascalie nei musei,
per arrivare ai programmi d’arte televisivi, ai CD-ROM sui musei, ai testi registrati e sentiti con gli
auricolari nei diversi luoghi artistici, alle conferenze e ai corsi1’”. Following Béacco (1995), Nobili
(2003) also distinguishes between art texts produced for internal circulation and those produced for
external circulation, i.e. texts which are respectively creating knowledge ex novo, or are
disseminating knowledge already established in the art filed.
From a linguistic point of view, the study of art discourse has gained only minor interest.
According to Harris (2003), linguists have fairly neglected art discourse and the language of visual
arts in general. Studies focused mostly on particular arts at particular period (e.g. Pollit/Seaver’s
study of the terminology of painting, sculpture and architecture in ancient Greece: Pollit/Seaver
1974) or provided lists of the specialised lexis in the field of the arts (Baxandall 1991 on the
language of art criticism; Hausmann 1991 on the use of figurative language in art history), saying
little about how language substantiates the assumptions and values of art discourse as a professional
or academic use of language.
A major debate within art discourse involves the manipulation of art discourse in order to
serve the interests of particular social groups and agendas. Harris (2003:xi) points out that “artspeak
has always been propaganda”: its vocabulary cannot be neutral and any discussion of art is based
“on socially, politically and educationally ‘loaded’ terms”. In artspeak, “what matters is what we
say about it” (2003: 208): a condition opposed to sciencespeak, for instance, where what matters is
the thing spoken of. Members of the artspeak community then have “the responsibility of
questioning, at every possible opportunity, the terms in which artistic judgements are delivered” by
the modern media. As artspeak is open-ended and cannot be put under control, the condition of
liberty for its participants is one of “eternal vigilance” (ibid.).
A further point of discussion is the alleged difficulty and obscurity of artspeak, especially
with regard to art criticism and scholarly writing, such as books and catalogue essays, to the point
1 “Art discourse [...] is very rich and various: it goes from criticism, museum catalogues, art magazines, newspaper articles,
explicative tables and labels in museums, to art broadcasts, museum CD-ROM, audio guides, and lectures (my translation)”.
66
that even professionals sometimes declare their disregard for over-theorized texts2. Harris
(2003:205) argues that “artspeak has become an esoteric dialect of journalese (both popular and
academic)”, while addressing museum texts, such as labels, brochures and catalogues entries,
Ravelli 2006 stresses the frustration of visitors facing “texts which are overly complex”.
Keeping the focus on the issue of obscurity of artspeak, it has to be mentioned a recent essay
on the relationship between language, legibility and power in the art world written by Rule and
Levine (2012), published in the online American art journal Triple Canopy. Rule and Levine (2012)
analyzed a corpus of press releases circulated by e-flux – a powerful New York-based subscriber
network for art-world professionals – between 1999 and 2012 in order to describe the language of
contemporary art and argued that the official language of art was a special jargon written in a sort of
lingua franca, sounding like ‘inexpertly translated French’. They christened it ‘International Art
English’, or IAE, and concluded that its purest form was the gallery press release, which – in
today's increasingly globalised, internet-widened art world – has a greater audience than ever. Rule
and Levine also concluded that the IAE serves interests and is a potent signal of insider status for
art-world people; its use is therefore strictly connected with power in the art world. Despite its
controversial content – the essay has been discussed in the Guardian newspaper3 and further
accused to be ‘pseudo-academic’4 – Rule and Levine (2012) have touched an issue of great interest
for art discourse: not only its ambiguity, that may slip into propaganda, but also its predictability,
which is the result of a series of recursive expressions belonging to aesthetic vocabulary and
evaluative patterns. It does not come as a surprise, therefore, that many ‘artist statement generators’
can be found on the web, i.e. applications that help artists write a conventional presentation and
automatically generate a text written according to the rules of jargon adopted by art-world
professionals, simply by filling out a pre-constructed form5.
With regard to the genres of art discourse, studies focused especially on exhibition reviews
(Swales 2004b, Radighieri 2005, 2009), museum texts (Ravelli 2006), and museums websites
(Bondi 2009). Given that “the only raison d’être of the Press Release is to be retold” (Jacobs 1999a:
xi), the analysis of art reviews can be very insightful, as they represent a second phase in the life of
2 The San Francisco Chronicle’s art critic, Kenneth Baker, declared in an interview: “I seldom read photo criticism, apart from the
occasional exhibition catalogue essay (for information) and a few classics: Sontag, Barthes, etc. [....]. Most academic writing I read,
or try to read, strikes me as over-theorized”. Similarly, the Italian critic Michele Smargiassi, who works for the newspaper La
Repubblica, replied that “sometimes the language of art criticism seems to compete with art or poetry, as if it were an object to be
critically explained itself. The obscurity of certain texts may also be a ploy for hiding lacking of contents” ( 'L’imperialismo della
critica', Il Giornale dell’arte –The Art Newspaper. May 2012, 3).
3 http://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2013/jan/27/users-guide-international-art-english
4 http://www.huffingtonpost.com/artinfo/international-art-english-the-joke-that-forgot-it-was-funny_b_3397760.html
5 See, for instance, http://www.artybollocks.com/ and http://500letters.org/
67
EPAs and can determine their value and their effectiveness as a mean of communication. More
recently, a new series of studies in the field of art discourse arose, with regard to the genre of
doctoral theses in the visual and performing arts, such as Paltridge et al. 2011, Paltridge et al. 2012
and Starfield et al. 2012. They mainly focus on the relation between written and visual components
of theses, on their macrostructure and capacity to change over time.
Exhibition presentations published on museums websites are very similar to EPAs and are
often derived from them. Bondi (2009) analysed the websites of five London museums, focusing on
presentation pages, but also considering pages for virtual tours and room guides. The analysis of the
corpus revealed common features in the structure of the exhibition presentations, which is
reproduced below:
Move 1 - Identifying the exhibition
a) title
b) dates
c) location
d) admission
e) sponsors and partners
Move 2 – Justifying the exhibition
Providing contextual explanation establishing a niche
Establishing credentials by indicating importance or need
Move 3 – Introducing the exhibition
Purpose
Theme
Structure
Move 4
Detailing the aspects of the exhibition (recursive)
Describing aspect
Indicating the value of aspect
Move 5 – Establishing value of the exhibition
(Bondi 2009: 119)
68
The study also highlighted the promotional nature of exhibition web-presentations through
the language of evaluation, contributing to the positive image of the artist, the curator and the
museum itself (Bondi 2009: 127).
Since the main communicative purpose of art discourse is to describe, interpret and evaluate
art works from a subjective perspective, the theme of evaluation plays a major role in the textual
genres belonging to this domain. Among studies focused on this aspect is Tucker (2003), who
analyzed the art-historical research article, showing that a peculiarity of art-historical discourse
seems to be the projection of interpretative evaluations, typically through the use of a mental or
verbal process verb followed by the preposition as. This study has been followed by further papers
on the language of visual art in English, such as Tucker (2004), which investigates art-historical
discourse with the aim of identifying typical strategies used in this field to express evaluation, and
on the relation between description and point of view (Tucker 2009). More recently, Tucker (2013)
examined the character and function of justificatory arguments in writing on visual arts, i.e. the
statements produced by a speaker to support a claim.
Since the visual component is paramount in art discourse, description has to be regarded as a
key concept for this domain and plays a significant role also in EPAs, as the following analysis will
demonstrate. As pointed out by Baxandall in reference to the description of art works, “a
description will tend to represent …] thought after seeing a picture”(1985:4), i.e. artistic
descriptions stand as ‘mediating objects’ between the art work and its explanation (Baxandall 1985:
10).
Description is characterized by ‘reference to phenomena in space’ (Werlich 1976: 47). It can
be analyzed in terms of the described object (person, object, place), the features mentioned (e.g. for
a person: physical appearance, attitudes, ways of speaking, etc.), focus and point of view: from
detail to general, or vice versa, according to the writer’s perspective. In descriptive passages –
according to Smith (2003: 69-72) – time is static and situations are characterized by verbs of state.
Deixis – of person, place and time – obviously plays a major role in descriptions and, as proposed
by Bondi (2013) , it can be seen “as an attention-managing device that the writer uses to direct the
reader’s attention to new referents” (Bondi 2013: 128). Bondi (2013) also draws attention on the
“selective procedures required by descriptions” and “the filter inevitably imposed by the observer
on the observed” (7). This process has been also identified as the “speaker’s imprint in descriptive
discourse” (Merlini Barbaresi 2009), which is also linked to the notion of subjectivity in language.
According to Merlini Barbaresi (2009) descriptions are “inherently subjective”, but subjectivity is
often “ineffable (unconscious and non-predicated)” and gradable, to the point that, if upgraded, “it
69
will move into conscious stance-taking, thus turning the descriptive type into the argumentative
type” (2009: 36). For this reason, when analyzing description, Bondi (2009b:125) suggests to
distinguish between perspective, “referring to spatio-temporal conditions of discourse allowing
access to knowledge”, and position, “referring to emotional and ideological points of view as
reflected in evaluations of ‘value’ (Hunston 2000) and references to cultural frameworks” (2013: 9).
As pointed out by Merlini Barbaresi (2009: 20-22), description gives evidentia, a
visualization of the scene described, and may involve all the senses (touch, hearing, smell, taste).
Similarly, according to Reuter (2000: 29) descriptions construct an image that the reader can
reconstruct as if recognizing it. The main effect of a description seems to be to make people see
objects and scenes, and its relation to an implicit explicative dimension can thus easily be seen
(Reuter 1998: 52).
No apparatus suited to the description of texts dealing with the visual arts has been clearly
identified by scholars yet, thus every kind of description has its different features, according to the
genre containing it (Merlini Barbaresi 2004). It can be therefore useful to analyse description in
EPAs in order to highlight some of the specificities of this genre.
5.4 Summary
Throughout this chapter we stressed that the genre of EPAs can be situated within the large
boundaries of media, art and promotional discourse. Each discursive domain was briefly sketched,
placing special attention on the most relevant theoretical issues, previous scholarly research and
mostly discussed topics. This chapter of the thesis aimed at providing a backdrop for the genre of
EPAs. Next, in the following chapters 6 and 7, the design of the corpus and methods applied in the
analysis will be described.
70
6. Materials
As none of the existing diachronic corpora was suitable for the purposes of the present
research, a new corpus was compiled, the EPA Diacorpus. It is a multiple diachronic corpus, made
up of 300 thousand words (tokens). It includes 378 EPAs, half (187) issued by American museums
and half (191) by British museums, dating from 1950 to 2009, as summarized by the following
table (6.1):
EPA Diacorpus
Corpus size 299,138 words
Number of texts 378 (187 US, 191 UK)
Full texts Full texts
Medium Written (press releases)
Subject Exhibition press announcements
Authorship Multiple professional writers
Language Texts written in English by native speakers
Publication date March 1950 – December 2009
Tab.6.1 – Main features of the EPA Diacorpus
A corpus of this size may be small compared to the general English multi-million-word
corpora available today, but for the purposes of the present study, it was assumed to be balanced
and representative.
EPAs were randomly and evenly selected across decades, with no particular criteria beside
their status of exhibition press announcements, e.g. press releases announcing an up-coming art
show. All other press releases issued by museums, such as ordinary news, announcements of artist
talks, presentations of films or books, accomplishments, awards, new appointments, philanthropic
events, etc, were dismissed. It is to be noted, however, that EPAs represent the largest part of the
documents usually produced by museum press offices.
The number of writers involved in the composition of EPAs is not easy to quantify.
Although most of the EPAs collected in the corpus are signed by a press officer – an acknowledged
professional specialized in museum public relations – EPAs are often the result of the work of a
composite team of experts. A first draft, for instance, may be traced back to a text written by the
curator of an exhibition, who first conceived a project; the EPA also has to be verified by members
71
of the managerial staff – i.e. the director of the museum, the board of directors, etc… – , while other
useful comments and suggestions may come from co-workers, before the final draft is released.
Therefore, the EPA Diacorpus represents multiple writers.
A further explanation has to be provided with regard to the choice of analyzing a corpus of
texts only written in English. Assuming that selecting EPAs originally written in English can avoid
problems connected with the translation into a second language, it has to be considered that in our
time the art-world is globalised (see Mosquera 2010). Art-world professionals are now engaged at
an international level and English is their first working language. Brochures, leaflets, catalogues,
websites and press materials have necessarily to be provided in English in order to reach the largest
audience possible and even institutions outside the English-speaking area translate into English their
promotional tools.
Further, the EPA Diacorpus is a DIY – ‘do-it-yourself’ – corpus (McEnery et al. 2006: 71),
which is built among the following methodological principles, with respect to both the museums
choice and the period selection for inclusion. The decision whether to create a hybrid corpus,
including both British and American EPAs, or a more homogeneous corpus, comprised of only
American (or only British) EPAs, was also crucial.
With regard to the first question, large, high-profile museums were preferred, because they
could guarantee a significant coverage of EPAs across the twentieth century and their accessibility
for research. Three British and five American institutions were identified: the London National
Gallery, the London Victoria&Albert Museum, the London Royal Academy of Arts, the New York
Museum of Modern Art, the New York Solomon R. Guggenheim Mususeum, the Los Angeles J.
Paul Getty Museum, the New York Frick Collection and the Chicago Museum of Contemporary
Art. The selection was also influenced by the format of the data, which was available in electronic
form only in a minor part. Museums began to digitalize press releases at the end of the 1990s or
even later. The New York Museum of Modern Art1 and the Los Angeles J. Paul Getty Museum2
provide a significant exception, allowing website visitors to search within their digitalized historical
archives updated respectively from 1929 and from 1954 onwards. The New York Solomon R.
Guggenheim Museum3 also offers an overview of historical press releases dating from 1952
onwards on its website, but the work is still in progress and at the moment only a small number of
documents has been digitalized. Furthermore, British museums retain historical EPAs only on paper
format and documents have to be consulted in loco. As a result, most British documents of the EPA
Diacorpus, especially the earlier, were found directly at museums archives; they were
1 http://www.moma.org/learn/resources/press_archives
2 http://www.getty.edu/research
3 http://www.guggenheim.org/new-york/collections/library-and-archives/archive-collections/A0035/
72
photographed, OCR scanned and transformed into *.txt format (see, for instance, the example
reported in figure 6.1 at the end of this chapter). A further amount of EPAs, already available in
digital form, was downloaded from websites. In particular, earlier British EPAs, dating from 1950
to 1999, were found at the London National Gallery Library, the London Royal Academy of Arts
Library and the London Victoria and Albert Museum Archives. Some US institutions also
cooperated in a significant way sending paper or digital copies of historical EPAs from their
archives (The New York Frick Collection and The Chicago Museum of Contemporary Art).
Sometimes the quality of the original images was too low to permit satisfactory OCR scanning and
texts were keyed in manually. The advantage of manual digitization, “the final, and usually last
resort of corpus builder” (Baker 2006:35), is nonetheless that it does give the chance to become
acquainted with the text and aware of the types of research questions that could prove worthy of
investigation (Brownlees 2012: 15).
The sources of the EPA Diacorpus, the number of EPAs retrieved for each institution and
the original format of documents are summarized in the table below (Tab. 6.2):
Country City Institution EPAs Original format
UK London The Victoria and Albert Museum 61 15% digital; 85% on paper
UK London Royal Academy of Arts 58 35% digital; 65% on paper
UK London National Gallery 72 15% digital; 85% on paper
US Los Angeles J. Paul Getty Museum 35 100% digital
US New York Museum of Modern Art 74 100% digital
US New York The Solomon R. Guggenheim Foundation 46
100% digital
US Chicago Museum of Contemporary Art 17 100% digital
US New York The Frick Collection 15 100% on paper
TOT. 378
Tab.6.2 – EPA Diacorpus: sources, number, and original format of EPAs
With regard to the second question, i.e. the period to cover for the present diachronic study,
six decades were selected, from the start of regular publication of EPAs in 1950 to 2009. Earlier
examples may also be identified4, but their distribution was not homogeneous across decades,
4 The first press release issued by a museum which was found available dates back to 1929 and belongs to the New
York Museum of Modern Art. It announces the opening of the museum and the start of its activities: “The belief that
New York needs a Museum of Modern Art scarcely requires apology. All over the world the rising tide of interest in the
modern movement has found expression not only in private collections but also in the formation of great public
73
especially during World War II, when most museums interrupted their activities. Moreover, some
highly representative museums, such as the New York Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum and the
Los Angeles J. Paul Getty Museum, were only founded in the 1950s.
As for the third question – whether to create a corpus made up only of British EPAs, or only
of American EPAs, or a hybrid one, the last option was decided upon. This decision was taken in
view of the fact that American and British EPAs share much similarity and can studied together.
According to McLean (2012) the development of museum public relations – and therefore EPAs –
started in the US after World War II and subsequently spread in Western Europe. It can therefore be
assumed that American EPAs inspired the British ones. British and American EPAs have been
evenly distributed in the EPA Diacorpus and together they can give a representative linguistic
picture of the genre and of the period they cover.
Nevertheless, the EPA Diacorpus is divided into two main components, US EPAs and UK
EPAs, to be analysed separately and together. Each component is further divided into six sub-
corpora, one for each decade, which evenly comprises both English and American EPAs, as shown
in the table below (Tab. 6.3).
US UK TOT
1950 30 30 60
1960 30 32 62
1970 33 33 66
1980 30 31 61
1990 31 32 63
2000 33 33 66
187 191 378
Tab.6.3 - EPA Diacorpus: number of EPAs across decades and countries
So far a general outline of the EPA Diacorpus in its main components has been provided. It has to
be noted that the corpus is not marked up; nonetheless, it allows an in-depth diachronic analysis of
the genre of EPAs in qualitative and quantitative terms. Moreover, the corpus could be implemented
in the future as an “open-ended” research source (Rissanen 1989:17). As Baker says (2006: 42) it is
always “possible to go back to the building stage at a later point to carry out new forms of
galleries for the specific purpose of exhibiting permanent as well as temporary collections of modern art. That New
York has no such gallery is an extraordinary anachronism.”. (Publicity for organization of Museum, August 1929,
MoMA press archives. Accessed at http://www.moma.org/learn/resources/press_archives).
74
annotation”. In the next chapter (7) the methods selected for the analysis will be presented and a
detailed account of the procedures adopted in this study will be provided.
Figure 6.1 – Front page of an EPA issued by the Victoria & Albert Museum in 1952
75
7. Methods
The present study follows the principles of corpus-assisted discourse studies (CADS), as
carried out, among others, by Stubbs (1996, 2001), Partington (1998, 2004, 2009) and Baker
(2006). The analysis therefore combines a quantitative or statistical approach with a qualitative and
analytical one.
A corpus-driven approach has been initially adopted (Tognini-Bonelli 2001), starting from a
naïve position and allowing the data to drive the research, instead of beginning with pre-fabricated
hypotheses.
The data processing consisted of different stages, ranging from computer-based to manual
analysis of the texts.
In order to become acquainted with the data and aware of the types of research questions
that could prove worthy of investigation, a preliminary analysis was carried out. In the first place, in
order to gain a general overview of the corpus, the vocabulary size of the EPA Diacorpus and its
sub-corpora was derived. Type/token ratio (TTR) was calculated, as well as standardized type/token
ratio (STTR) and mean sentence length. Secondly, a pilot study was tested on a sample of 80 EPAs
drawn from the wider corpus.
In view of the findings of the preliminary analysis, it was stipulated to concentrate the
exploration of the EPA Diacorpus on two main linguistic aspects: diachronic lexical variation and
diachronic structural variation, to be carried out, respectively, in chapter 8 and 9 of this thesis.
With regard to the organization of this chapter, in the following section (7.1) the results of
the preliminary analysis are reported. More specifically, an overview of general statistics
concerning the EPA Diacorpus is provided in sub-section 7.1.1, along with a brief interpretation of
them, while an account of the procedures followed for the pilot study and related results are
provided in sub-section 7.1.2. Section 7.3 describes the methods applied to identify lexical items
worth of interest in terms of diachronic lexical variation within the corpus and the subsequent
procedures used to analyse them. Eventually, the methodologies taken into account to detect the
diachronic structural development of EPAs are described in section 7.4.
76
7.1 Preliminary analysis
7.1.1 EPA Diacorpus: general statistics
Information regarding vocabulary size, as well as the distribution of words, is very important
when exploring corpora. The vocabulary size of EPA Diacorpus and its sections was derived using
a program suite largely acknowledged in linguistics, WordSmith Tools 5 (Scott 2007).
A first bunch of statistics extracted from the EPA Diacorpus is provided by the following
table (tab.7.1). The columns respectively report: the number of EPAs, the number of tokens, the
number of word types, TTR values, STTR values, and mean sentence length expressed in number of
words. Horizontally reading, values are distinguished according to the provenance of EPAs – US
and UK – and periods – 1950, 1960, 1970, 1980, 1990, 2000 –.
EPA Diacorpus - General Statistics
Number of EPAs Word Tokens Word Types TTR STTR Mean sentence lenght
US EPAs 187 180.375 15.295 8,92 44,41 19,88
UK EPAs 191 118.763 11.492 10,26 43,41 23,08
Overall 378 299.138 20.384 7,19 44,18 21,04
Number of EPAs Word Tokens Word Types TTR STTR Mean sentence lenght
1950 60 41.191 6.143 15,44 42,35 19,33
1960 62 43.799 6.724 15,97 43,72 19,4
1970 66 36.400 5.516 15,97 41,5 19,97
1980 61 39.104 6.219 16,92 44,3 21,54
1990 63 54.856 7.752 15,16 44,54 21,96
2000 66 83.960 10.074 12,70 44,8 22,77
Tab. 7.1 - EPA Diacorpus: general statistics (1)
As shown by table 7.1, the EPA Diacorpus amounts to 299,138 tokens and 20,384 word
types. Tokens simply denote all the running words of a spoken or written text and if a specific word
form occurs more often, these occurrences are counted as well. Conversely, a word type is a single
word form; when counting types, therefore, multiple occurrences are not taken into consideration.
In order to gain more information about the vocabulary variation, the ratio of different word
types to tokens, also called type/token ratio (TTR), has also been calculated. A high TTR indicates a
large amount of lexical variation, while a low TTR indicates a limited lexical variation. It has to be
77
noted that larger corpora give lower values for TTR; therefore, it is better to consider the
standardised type/token ratio (STTR), “calculated for the first 1,000 running words, then calculated
afresh for the next 1,000, and so on to the end of your text or corpus” (Scott 2007). The overall
STTR value of the EPA Diacorpus is 44.18. This indicates that there are at least 44 word types in
every 1000 words of the EPA Diacorpus. In order to provide a term of comparison, we can recall,
for instance, that the STTR in the FLOB corpus of British English, which contains a range of
written texts from different genres, is 45.53. This result suggests that the EPA Diacorpus comprises
a significant variety of words, not far from that of FLOB.
Eventually, the mean sentence length of the corpus was calculated, which is 21.04. This
value is based on a count that identifies sentences as a “full-stop, question-mark or exclamation-
mark [...] immediately followed by one or more word separators and then a capital letter in the
current language, a number or a currency symbol “ (Scott 2007).
Considering the EPA Diacorpus in its whole extension, table 7.1 highlights a difference in
terms of length between American and British EPAs, covering respectively 60% (180,375 tokens)
and 40% (118,763 tokens) of the overall tokens, despite texts are almost equally distributed across
both areas (187 American and 191 British EPAs). But while American EPA writers are wordier,
their British colleagues seem to employ longer sentences in comparison (+3.2 words). With regard
to the lexical variety, expressed by STTR, both components of the corpora show relevant values
(44.41 and 43.41 respectively for American and British EPAs).
From a diachronic perspective, EPAs have become not only longer but also more
syntactically developed and lexically richer over time: their length has more than doubled, from
about 40 thousand tokens in the 1950s to more than 80 thousand tokens in the 2000s. Also the
number of words used in each sentence, which went from 19.33 in the 1950s to 22.77 in the 2000s
(+ 3.44), and the lexical variety, which went from 42.35 to 44.8 ( +2.45), have increased.
Exploring the decades, at least two periods seem to be particularly relevant in terms of
change and worth of further investigation: between the 1960s and the 1970s, when the value of
STTR shrinks down, quiet unexpectedly, from 43.72 to 41.5, and between the 1970s and the 1980s,
when, on the contrary, a rapid growth is evidenced, from 41.5 and 44.3.
Let us now consider American and British EPAs separately. The following table (tab. 7.2)
provides a further statistical focus on these two main components of the EPA Diacorpus. The first
half of the table mirrors the American section, while the second half is reflective of the British.
Once again, the columns report: the number of EPAs, the number of tokens, the number of word
types, TTR values, STTR values, and mean sentence length expressed in number of words.
78
Horizontally reading, values are distinguished according to the provenance of EPAs – US and UK –
and periods – 1950, 1960, 1970,1980, 1990, 2000 – .
EPA Diacorpus - US EPAs
Number of EPAs Word Tokens Word Types TTR STTR Mean sentence lenght
US 1950 30 25.058 4.217 17,50 42,37 18,24
US 1960 30 24.871 4.605 19,32 44,01 18,63
US 1970 33 21.893 4.005 19,26 41,5 18,38
US 1980 30 23.355 4.395 20,03 43,4 20,02
US 1990 31 32.855 5.748 18,68 45,28 20,44
US 2000 33 52.515 7.773 15,49 45,18 21,91
EPA Diacorpus - UK EPAs
Number of EPAs Word Tokens Word Types TTR STTR Mean sentence lenght
UK 1950 30 16.133 3.374 21,50 42,25 21,28
UK 1960 32 18.928 3.704 20,26 42,73 20,5
UK 1970 33 15.042 2.923 20,53 20,66
UK 1980 31 15.749 3.385 22,84 46,1 24,27
UK 1990 32 22.001 3.953 19,43 42,43 24,74
UK 2000 33 31.468 4.931 16,91 43,61 26,44
Tab. 7.2 - EPA Diacorpus: general statistics (2)
As shown by tab. 7.2, American EPAs have more than doubled their length over the period,
going from 25,058 to 52,515 tokens; they have also become richer in terms of lexis, gaining almost
three points of STTR (+2,81), from 42.37 to 45.18. The number of words used in each sentence
gradually increased, shifting from 18.24 to 21.92 (+3.68).
The length of British EPAs has fast doubled as well, going from 16,133 to 31,468 tokens,
but, while sentences became significantly longer, shifting from 21.28 to 26.44 words (+5.16), the
lexis registered only little variation over the entire period, going from 42.25 to 43.61 (+1.36).
Unexpectedly, British EPAs reached the highest STTR value of the entire corpus in the 1980s
(46.1). To be fully explained, this point would require further steps in the analysis of the corpus.
Although interesting, these results remain at very superficial level. Hence it will be useful to
recall them at the end of this study, when conclusions will be drawn (see chapter 10): hopefully, it
will be possible to interpret statistical findings in a wider and richer perspective, as that provided by
a more refined analysis on vocabulary and generic structure of EPAs, to be carried out in chapters 8
and 9.
79
7.1.2 Pilot study
A consistent part of the preliminary analysis is represented by a pilot study carried out in
order to develop a possible methodology and test its viability.
The pilot study was tested on a sample drawn from the wider corpus. In order to identify the
most striking differences in terms of lexical choices and structure, a selection of 40 EPAs belonging
the 1950s and 40 EPAs belonging to the 2000s was selected. The sample was also equally balanced
between British and American EPAs.
In this preliminary phase of analysis the sample was explored in terms of frequency,
collocation and keyness of items, following Baker’s methodology (2006). In the first place,
wordlists were generated; the most frequent lexical words and lemmas were then identified and
analysed. Once a list of the most frequent terms was available, they were examined more in detail,
deriving frequency lists for clusters of words and sorting concordances. The collocates of the most
frequent lexical word in the corpus - exhibition - were calculated using the -3 to +3 span, because
this was most likely to include words which were included in noun phrases containing the search
word. A first list was derived using ranked frequencies. As a second step, only lexical words were
selected. Thirdly, Mutual Information or MI was selected among the statistical tests available for
computing collocational probability. Any score higher than 3 is usually deemed to be indicative of a
strong collocation: therefore, only collocates totalling a MI higher than 3 were considered. Finally,
the frequencies in the 2000 EPAs wordlist against 1950 EPAs wordlist were compared, in order to
determine the most significant keywords, and these were grouped into semantic-functional
categories.
A further level of linguistic analysis on the sample involved the generic move structure or
macro-structure analysis of the texts, bearing in mind the frameworks developed by Swales (1990,
2004) and Bhatia (1993, 2004).
With regard to the analysis of vocabulary, as could be easily expected, the main focus is on
exhibiting art works: ART is the most frequent lemma and exhibition is the most frequent lexical
word in the entire sample, as shown by the following tables, 7.3 and 7.4:
80
1950 top 10 lemmas 2000 top 10 lemmas
Rank Word Freq Rank Word Freq
1 ART 267 1 ART 630
2 EXHIBIT 259 2 EXHIBIT 428
3 PAINT 205 3 WORK 369
4 MUSEUM 184 4 MUSEUM 271
5 WORK 173 5 PHOTOGRAPH 233
6 SHOW 157 6 PAINT 191
7 SCULPT 114 7 INCLUDE 150
8 YEAR 101 8 COLLECT 149
9 COLLECT 97 9 CURATE 113
10 PICTURE 95 10 PRESS 112
Tab. 7.3 – Pilot study: top 10 lemmas
1950 top 10 lexical words 2000 top 10 lexical words
Rank Word Freq Rank Word Freq
1 exhibition 194 1 exhibition 363
2 museum 176 2 art 295
3 Art 144 3 museum 249
4 work 94 4 work 162
5 collection 73 5 works 161
6 artists 66 6 artists 107
7 shown 66 7 press 106
8= picture 63 8 collection 99
8= painting 63 9 artist 96
10 years 62 10 photographs 95
Tab. 7.4 - Pilot study: top 10 lexical words
These tables give us an idea of what the EPA Diacorpus is about. There are words
describing the contest of the exhibitions (art, pictures, paintings, works, photographs, sculpture,
collection), the kind of persons featured (artists) and the main recipient of the texts (press). So far,
results are self-explanatory; thus, the pilot study highlights that the way exhibitions are described
significantly varies over time. Findings related to the analysis of collocates of the most frequent
lexical word in the corpus - exhibition - are illustrated by tables below, 7.5 and 7.6:
81
Tab.7.5 – Pilot study: top 40 collocates of exhibition in 1950 EPAs
comprehensive, retrospective, second, contains, placed, organized, include, present, says, selected,
available, younger, international, arranged, open, special, included, talent, sculptors, france,
prints, european, part, represented, public, view, important, works, first, american, paintings, year,
one-man, press, shown, large, painting, organized, mr, one-man
Tab. 7.6 – Pilot study: top 40 collocates of exhibition in 2000 EPAs
accompanies, accompany, organisation, accompanied, organised, patrons, summer, sponsorship,
organized, accompanying, curated, focuses, sponsored, presents, included, designed, group, tour,
possible, include, feature, includes, publication, year, made, show, important, first, large, major,
part, royal, drawings, admission, view, academy, curator, moma, photography, getty
The analysis of the collocates shows the different connotations associated to the word
exhibition in the 1950s and in the 2000s, marking a shift towards commercial aspects, such as
admission, sponsorship, catalogues sale and guided tours.
Using WordSmith Tools 5 (Scott 2007), it was also possible to compare the frequencies in
one wordlist against another in order to determine which words occur statistically more often. This
part of the analysis, illustrated by the following table (tab. 7.7), aimed at observing the top 100
keywords, in order to highlight the peculiarity of contemporary EPAs in comparison with those
issued in the 1950s.
82
Rank Freq Keyness Keyword 34 33 24.868 walker 68 17 16.473 essays
1 634 89.192 S 35 67 24.600 black 69 17 16.473 featured
2 77 74.613 uk 36 25 24.225 image 70 17 16.473 sugimoto
3 61 59.109 moma 37 25 24.225 office 71 17 16.473 wales
4 60 58.140 pm 38 52 23.293 book 72 39 16.206 further
5 94 57.178 getty 39 24 23.256 bill 73 106 15.537 press
6 59 57.171 www 40 24 23.256 programs 74 16 15.504 couture
7 58 56.202 cremaster 41 61 22.625 matisse 75 16 15.504 explores
8 153 55.821 guggenheim 42 23 22.287 ac 76 31 15.488 publication
9 54 52.326 film 43 23 22.287 curated 77 22 15.005 call
10 68 51.557 fashion 44 23 22.287 vam 78 22 15.005 culture
11 52 50.388 org 45 402 21.532 on 79 22 15.005 raphael
12 63 47.013 please 46 22 21.318 narrative 80 30 14.707 artistic
13 46 44.574 gursky 47 29 21.247 tickets 81 26 14.613 tour
14 68 42.652 photography 48 29 21.247 viola 82 15 14.535 arbus
15 42 40.698 contact 49 82 21.198 arts 83 15 14.535 company
16 50 40.520 images 50 64 20.540 contemporary 84 15 14.535 films
17 41 39.729 evans 51 21 20.349 email 85 15 14.535 fully
18 47 37.736 admission 52 21 20.349 explore 86 15 14.535 registered
19 80 36.445 royal 53 21 20.349 fax 87 15 14.535 senior
20 68 35.730 curator 54 21 20.349 islamic 88 15 14.535 twilight
21 62 34.079 v&a 55 21 20.349 sander 89 65 14.486 picasso
22 43 34.036 paper 56 20 19.380 create 90 21 14.127 demand
23 35 33.915 barney 57 20 19.380 royalacademy 91 21 14.127 summer
24 75 32.699 academy 58 26 18.554 visit 92 45 13.939 free
25 33 31.977 tel 59 19 18.411 deutsche 93 25 13.795 around
26 32 31.008 career 60 19 18.411 level 94 25 13.795 unique
27 31 30.039 cycle 61 19 18.411 publications 95 14 13.566 dante
28 67 29.314 information 62 19 18.411 sisley 96 14 13.566 focus
29 30 29.070 global 63 1683 18.391 and 97 14 13.566 matthew
30 30 29.070 rosenquist 64 161 17.890 works 98 14 13.566 organised
31 27 26.163 ra 65 18 17.442 hammershøi 99 14 13.566 photograph
32 27 26.163 video 66 47 17.289 september 100 14 13.566 significant
33 43 25.230 munch 67 36 16.534 catalogue
Tab. 7.7 – Pilot study: top 100 keywords of 2000 EPAs v. 1950 EPAs
83
Six main points derived from the keywords analysis have to be stressed in particular:
(1) 2000 EPAs have a high percentage of abbreviations and acronyms – highlighted in
yellow in the table 6 -, such as www, moma, org, uk, v&a, ra, etc. They are part of e-mails and
website addresses and typically belong to contemporary documents. They generally appear at the
end of the text, when providing contact information.
(2) There are many nouns in 2000 EPAs with high keyness, such as film, fashion,
photography, video (highlighted in orange). This suggests that while in the 1950s painting, drawing
and sculpture were the main forms of art displayed by museums, in the 2000s new media and new
topics to be addressed have emerged.
(3) A series of expressions in 2000 EPAs – highlighted in green - can be associated with a
move typical of promotional genres, the one identified by Bhatia (1993, 2004) as soliciting
response. In the closing part of the last paragraph of EPAs, the writer encourages further contact
with media people, using expressions such as please call, contact, for information but also
highlighting that publicity images are available in case of need.
(3) A focus on admission and tickets. These nouns – highlighted in blue - are extremely
rare in the 1950 EPAs, where only one occurrence of admission and one of tickets were found. This
can be interpreted as a consequence of the introduction of visitor fees.
(4) Among 2000 EPAs keywords are curator, curated – highlighted in pink -; curators
play a very significant role in the organization of contemporary exhibitions and they are mentioned
not only in order to make known their contribute, but also to add further value to exhibition itself in
terms of previous research and scientific concept.
(5) Among the top keywords in 2000 EPAs are the nouns book, publication, catalogue,
essays (highlighted in grey). They are all related to the mention of the catalogue or similar
publications to accompany the exhibition: a useful guide for those who need further information on
the display but also an item on sale in bookshops. Only four occurrences of catalogue, one of
publication and one of book, used in the sense of a volume to accompany the exhibition, were found
among 1950 EPAs.
84
The pilot study involved also a partial analysis of the generic macro-structure drawing from
Swales’ (1990, 2004) model. Texts in the sample were read in-depth with the aim to identify the
moves and relative communicative purposes. In order to establish a hierarchy among moves, the
framework of Henry and Roseberry (2001: 95) was followed. This suggests that moves that appear
in less than 50% of the texts of a corpus should be regarded as optional moves. Those that appear in
50-90% of the texts can be described as core moves. Obligatory moves are those appearing in 90-
100% of the compiled texts. The results of the structure analysis are provided by table 7.8 and 7.9
below.
Move Freq %
1 ANNOUNCING THE EXHIBITION 100
2 PRESENTING THE EXHIBITION 100
3 SOLICITING PRESS RESPONSE 50
Tab. 7.8 – Pilot study: identified structure of EPAs in the 1950s
Move Freq %
1 ANNOUNCING THE EXHIBITION 100
2 PRESENTING THE EXHIBITION 100
ESTABLISHING CREDENTIALS FOR THE
3 EXHIBITION 90
PROVIDING INFORMATION FOR
4 VISITORS 90
5 SOLICITING PRESS RESPONSE 90
Tab. 7.9 - Pilot study: identified structure of EPAs in the 2000s
The analysis of structure highlighted that while contemporary EPAs show a consistent
scheme, the one provided by earlier texts is unstable. Yet a prototypical structure can be identified
also in the 1950s and it comprised of three main moves: a brief announcement of the exhibition, a
long explanatory section on the topic, and some pieces of information specific for the press
members, soliciting their response, although in a very implicit way. In the 2000s two new moves
emerge: one establishing credentials for the exhibition and one providing technical information for
visitors. The way of soliciting the response of media is also more explicit.
85
Despite its limits, the preliminary analysis shows that the genre of EPAs went through
relevant changes over the last six decades. Lexical and structural variation seems to be particularly
worthy of further investigation. Moreover, in view of these preliminary findings, an in-depth
analysis could potentially bring about interesting results not only in terms of linguistic change but
also in terms of cultural change specific of the field of museums and art in general.
However, only a wider perspective can shed light on the evolution of EPAs, hence in the
following sections (7.2 and 7.3) the analytical methodologies will be extended to the EPA
Diacorpus in its entirety. More specifically, section 7.2 describes the methods applied to identify
lexical items showing diachronic variation – or absence of variation – within the EPA Diacorpus,
so as the procedures used to elicit contextual information on these items and explain their patterns
of usage, while in section 7.3 the methods applied to explore the diachronic structural variation of
EPAs are outlined.
7.2 Analysis of diachronic lexical variation
As suggested by the preliminary analysis, a type of research question that proves worthy of
investigation within the EPA Diacorpus is that concerning lexical variation over time. Baker’s
considerations on the mutual interaction between lexical and cultural change seem to be particularly
fitting for the context of EPAs, which is reflective of the value-system of the professional
communities involved, i.e. art journalists and museum professionals:
“Language change, perhaps particularly lexical change, has the potential to tell us much
about societal change. Language does not develop in isolation but has a dialectical
relationship with culture, both reflecting and spurring on changes in everyday life. New
words are developed to refer to new concepts or to re-conceptualize existing ones while
older or unfashionable words gradually fall into disuse”. (Baker 2011: 66)
The first level of linguistic analysis, to be carried out in chapter 8 of this study, focused
therefore on diachronic lexical variation and, in particular, on the investigation of patterns of
vocabulary change and stability over time.
Baker’s (2011) method to observe diachronic change across multiple corpora and to
distinguish variation over time served as a framework: actually, it made possible to identify a series
of relevant lexical items on which the subsequent analysis has been focused (see chapter 8).
86
Following Baker (2011), it was stipulated that for a word to be of interest in terms of
diachronic variation, it would need to occur at least 100 times when its frequencies across all the six
decades (1950, 1960, 1970,1980, 1990, 2000) were added together. Three hundred and twenty-six
(326) words met this criterion. In view of the size of the corpus, totaling 300 thousand words, the
relevant proportion is about 1/3,000, while Baker (2011) worked on a list of words occurring at
least 1,000 times over a multiple corpus of 4 million words, with a proportion of ¼,000.
Using the “detailed consistency analysis” function in Wordsmith Tool 5 (Scott 2007), it was
possible to obtain a single table that gave every instance of each word in all six sub-corpora, along
with their frequencies.
After dismissing a number of possible measures to quantify the strength of difference
between word frequencies, such as the chi-square test and the Pearson correlation coefficient,
Baker’s (2011) took into consideration Hofland and Johansson’s (1982) method. Hofland and
Johansson compared word frequencies in the British LOB and American Brown corpora using the
following formula:
(1) Freq LOB – Freq Brown
Freq LOB + Freq Brown
Baker’s (2011) tried adapting this measure to see if it would be effective on his four corpora:
(2)
Freq BLOB – Freq LOB – Freq FLOB – Freq BE06
Freq BLOB + Freq LOB + Freq FLOB + Freq BE06
I followed this suggestion and adapted Hofland and Johannson’s measure to the six sub-
corpora of the EPA Diacorpus in this way:
(3) Freq 1950 - Freq 1960 – Freq 1970 – Freq 1980 – Freq 1990 – Freq 2000
Freq 1950 + Freq 1960 + Freq 1970 + Freq 1980 + Freq 1990 + Freq 2000
This gave a score for each word, between 0.07 and -1. The twenty words with the highest
score, showing therefore the largest decrease over time, were mrs, mr, picture, represented, man,
acquired, shown, here, had, shows, exhibited, william, painters, examples, three, so, paris,
87
wednesday, still, and architecture. Conversely, the twenty words with the lowest scores, showing
the largest increases over time, were office, career, tel, uk, org, www, admission, tickets, frick, getty,
images, photography, visual, catalogue, please, students, contact, events, tour, and v&a.
However, the adapted formula of Hofland and Johannson does not deal with exceptional
data appropriately, as in the case of irregular frequency profiles across the six decades, where a
clear increasing or decreasing pattern cannot be detected. Some words do not show a unidirectional
pattern, such as, for instance, the noun architecture, which has a frequency profile of 29, 6, 7, 15,
40, 17. As a consequence, Baker suggests “an additional safety-guard measure” (2001:72), which is
to consider only words that show a continuous increase or decrease across the corpora and to
discard from the analysis words that do not show a constant (unidirectional) pattern.
Moreover, as pointed out by Baker (2011), Hofland and Johansson’s method does not
reveal which words remain stable over time. Baker suggest therefore the use of the standard
deviation (SD) score to identify high and low variation of the frequency of each word: “The
standard deviation […] measures the spread of data from the mean frequency of a word. It produces
a single score that indicates how far the data deviate from the mean. […] Potentially then, words
with a high standard deviation would have changed in frequency over time a great deal, whereas
those with low standard deviations would be more stable (2011:72)”.
Having calculated standard deviations of the 326 most frequent words in the corpus using
the software Excel (function STDEV), the frequency list was then sorted in descending order of SD.
The SDs of these words ranged from 3.08 to 1,287.50. The twenty words with the largest standard
deviations were exhibition, art, getty, works, museum, guggenheim, new, arts, collection, royal, uk,
mr, academy, press, information, curator, admission, artists, work, and frick, while those with the
lowest were landscape, colour, selected, death, held, release, form, used, selection, seen,
department, working, chicago, recent, born, abstract, subject, painter, europe, and forms.
Although interesting, this data needed to be corrected, since SD measures frequency rather
than variation. As suggested by Baker (2011), the correction used was the coefficient of variance
(CV), calculated by dividing the standard deviation by the mean and then multiplying by 100. As
CV score does not correlate with frequency, it was used to determine which words had strong and
weak variation over time. Next, the word list was divided into three equal-sized portions, reflecting
high change, medium change, and low change. The top third of the word list, ordered by CV, was
considered to have relatively high variation, the bottom third to have relatively low variation, and
the middle third to be relatively indistinctive and was not examined any further. The words ranged
88
in CV from 10.24 to 222.67. The twenty words with highest relative variation were www, org, uk,
events, tickets, frick, getty, please, v&a, tour, center, paper, tel, media, mrs, picture, images,
education, mr, and curator. Those with the lowest were release, landscape, until, national, which,
be, department, seen, form, drawings, held, great, known, paintings, among, made, may, first,
selected, and some. According to Baker, the latter may be defined as ‘lockwords’ due to the
consistency in their frequencies. This new term was invented to describe them: “The term lock was
chosen because it is related to key (key is the highest collocate of lock in the British National
Corpus (using log likelihood)), and furthermore, lock is a good description of these words: they
appear to be “locked” in place (2011:73)”. The strongest lockwords in the corpus are release, with a
frequency profile of 41, 53, 54, 50, 51, 45, and landscape, with 25, 27, 21, 23, 28, 29.
While CV score appears as a valuable parameter for identifying words showing a clear
pattern of stability, the identification of words showing continuous decline and growth is more
difficult. As a matter of fact, some words showing frequency increase or decrease according to the
Hofland and Johansson’s adapted measure and having a high CV, do not show a constant
(unidirectional) pattern. It is the case, for instance, of the verbal form exhibited, which has a profile
of 54, 41, 18, 16, 19, 40 occurrences across decades, but, for its technical meaning related to the
specificity of the corpus, could be however worth of interest, or of the abstract noun picture (96, 84,
16, 1, 15, 12), which, despite its irregular pattern, seems hard to exclude from investigation.
In view of their potential in mirroring cultural change related to museum settings and art in
general over time, it seemed preferable not to discard irregular items from the analysis, but to
analyze each case per se, keeping in mind that relative findings cannot be generalized and
hypotheses have to be formulated in a very careful way.
The final results of the calculation process, i.e. the ranking of words showing the largest
frequency increase, decrease and stability across decades in the EPA Diacorpus are provided in the
following tables (7.10, 7.11 and 7.12). Words are ranked, in the first place, according to their CV
score and, secondly, according to Hofland and Johansson score. Proper names were discarded from
the lists.
Table 7.10 shows the twenty words of the corpus with the strongest frequency increase
across the six time periods: uk, www, org, events, tickets, please, tour, tel, media, images,
education, curator, admission, contact, career, office, catalogue, students, photography and visual.
89
N Word 1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 CV Hofland & Johansson
1 uk 0 0 0 2 9 131 425,93 -1,00
2 www 0 0 0 0 6 133 232,49 -1,00
3 org 0 0 0 0 8 134 228,79 -1,00
4 events 3 7 7 5 16 68 141,83 -0,94
5 tickets 1 2 2 12 31 75 141,67 -0,98
6 please 6 2 22 34 55 149 122,36 -0,96
7 tour 3 5 4 8 33 51 115,42 -0,94
8 tel 0 6 11 12 52 70 113,85 -1,00
9 media 7 6 3 9 24 53 112,41 -0,86
10 images 3 11 8 21 77 90 109,28 -0,97
11 education 3 3 2 16 38 38 103,90 -0,94
12 curator 9 15 25 28 65 130 101,13 -0,93
13 admission 2 7 44 33 66 121 96,57 -0,99
14 contact 6 4 23 43 70 84 87,06 -0,95
15 career 0 11 8 27 34 49 85,70 -1,00
16 office 0 5 22 35 49 51 80,50 -1,00
17 catalogue 5 14 30 58 58 84 72,86 -0,96
18 students 3 10 17 23 28 43 68,34 -0,95
19 photography 4 22 32 59 71 80 66,98 -0,97
20 visual 2 16 15 14 22 38 66,39 -0,96
Tab. 7.10 – EPA Diacorpus: words showing the strongest frequency increases
Table 7.11 shows the twenty words with the sharpest decreases: mrs, picture, mr,
architecture, here, acquired, represented, man, shown, exhibited, shows, had, still, so, since,
famous, examples, painters, there, and country.
N Word 1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 CV Hofland & Johansson
1 mrs 74 17 10 11 6 20 110,81 0,07
2 picture 96 84 16 1 15 12 110,67 -0,14
3 mr 147 63 30 13 23 19 103,84 0,00
4 architecture 29 6 7 15 40 17 69,59 -0,49
5 here 31 32 13 13 7 8 64,93 -0,40
6 acquired 32 27 10 9 6 17 62,80 -0,37
7 represented 57 22 23 21 15 25 55,21 -0,30
8 man 50 34 24 13 13 21 54,93 -0,35
9 shown 95 72 32 27 42 36 53,10 -0,38
10 exhibited 54 41 18 16 19 40 50,41 -0,43
11 shows 29 24 15 7 10 15 50,15 -0,42
12 had 73 54 31 23 24 43 47,28 -0,41
13 still 31 11 19 17 10 30 46,12 -0,47
14 so 40 36 21 16 15 22 42,03 -0,47
15 since 47 29 26 24 17 46 38,97 -0,50
16 famous 35 33 16 19 26 13 38,51 -0,51
17 examples 30 16 9 19 21 15 38,36 -0,45
18 painters 38 15 17 26 19 24 36,16 -0,45
19 there 50 51 53 24 30 27 34,46 -0,57
20 country 32 26 25 25 18 11 31,99 -0,53
Tab. 7.11 – EPA Diacorpus: words showing the strongest frequency decreases
90
Eventually, table 7.12, shows the twenty words with less variation in their frequencies:
release, landscape, until, which, be, department, seen, form, drawings, held, great, known,
paintings, among, made, first, selected, some, director and are.
N Word 1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 CV Hofland & Johansson
1 release 41 53 54 50 51 45 10,24 -0,72
2 landscape 25 27 21 23 28 29 12,09 -0,67
3 until 34 36 29 30 22 35 16,82 -0,63
4 which 224 230 166 162 170 236 17,85 -0,62
5 be 209 294 227 199 202 287 18,25 -0,71
6 department 23 30 32 29 40 37 19,00 -0,76
7 seen 30 31 24 23 27 38 19,05 -0,65
8 form 28 26 16 23 29 29 20,01 -0,63
9 drawings 86 85 59 60 97 67 20,87 -0,62
10 held 22 21 18 28 21 31 20,98 -0,69
11 great 37 30 32 39 45 52 21,02 -0,69
12 known 41 39 26 34 24 38 21,14 -0,59
13 paintings 87 86 105 116 106 151 22,00 -0,73
14 among 40 33 32 30 31 51 22,35 -0,63
15 made 55 60 42 63 65 84 22,36 -0,70
16 first 109 107 75 119 136 150 22,40 -0,69
17 selected 14 26 23 16 23 21 22,41 -0,77
18 some 52 71 50 34 56 54 22,47 -0,67
19 director 40 48 51 39 25 47 22,60 -0,68
20 are 255 217 171 174 207 301 22,62 -0,62
Tab. 7.12 – EPA Diacorpus: words showing less variation in their frequencies
An in-depth analysis of the lexical items obtained from the calculation described so far is to
be carried out in the next chapter of the thesis (chapter 8). This consisted of different stages:
(1) following Baker (2011), the 60 words under investigation were grouped into several
grammatical categories: auxiliary verbs, lexical verbs, lexical nouns (abstract), lexical nouns
(concrete), adjectives, adverbials and pro-forms, prepositions, determiners, question words,
acronyms, terms of address and interjections. Each category was analysed in turn.
(2) In order to make immediately visible the performances of the relevant lexical items over
time, a graphic representation of the frequencies of each of them was provided in the form of a line
graph obtained with the software Excel.
91
(3) The frequencies of each relevant lexical item were also compared between the American
and British section of the corpus, in order to highlight any discrepancy.
(5) Multiple concordance searches and collocational analyses of words were conducted to
elicit contextual information that might explain their typical patterns of usage. Items under scrutiny
were examined more in detail deriving frequency lists for clusters of words and sorting
concordances. The collocates were calculated using the -3 to +3 span.
(6) Eventually, in order to compare data, a reference corpus was used. The comparison
corpus in this study was the Time Magazine Corpus (Davies 2007), made up of roughly 100 million
words and 275,000 articles taken from the American periodical TIME Magazine (1923 to the
present). Freely available on line, it is the largest diachronic corpus of 20th century American
English, and its size allows for accurate analysis of linguistic change across the decades.
Data were interpreted not only in terms of linguistic variation, but also in their potential of
suggesting and explaining the great cultural changes in the field of exhibitions, museums and visual
arts in general happened from 1950 onwards.
7.3 Analysis of diachronic structural variation
The second stage of the analysis, to be carried out in chapter 9, involved an investigation of
the generic structure of EPAs and aimed at identifying its evolution over time.
The methodological approach was the same adopted, in a minor scale, in the pilot study and
draws from the acknowledged work of genre analysts such as Swales (1990, 2004) and Bhatia
(1993, 2004). Following Swales' work (1990, 2004), in particular, which has been already
introduced and illustrated in chapter 2 of the present thesis, a manual analysis of moves and steps
was undertaken.
Moves are identifiable units that contribute to the overall communicative purpose of a text
(Bhatia 1993: 30). Identification of moves and their sub-types, known as steps, depends on the
researcher and what he/she regards as realizations of underlying communicative functions. Even
Swales’ way of labeling moves was followed, using verb rather than noun phrases, as verb phrases
denote an active process and can enable a researcher to link the relevant move to the function of the
move. In addition, a categorization of moves, in terms of optional, core and obligatory moves was
attempted, following Henry and Roseberry (2001).
92
As moves can be more or less frequent in a corpus of genre texts, it was necessary to
distinguish them according to their frequency in order to achieve a representative structural
interpretation. The framework of Henry and Roseberry (2001: 95) allows to establish a hierarchy
among moves, suggesting that those that appear in less than 50% of the texts of a corpus can be
regarded as optional; those that appear in 50-90% of the texts are core, while those appearing in 90-
100% are obligatory.
The identification of EPA moves and steps was also inspired by McLaren and Gurâu’s
(2005), who have explored a corpus of press releases issued by companies in the UK biotechnology
sector, highlighting a recurrent move structure for corporate press releases – announcement,
elaboration, comment, contact details and editor’s note – and by the structure detected by Bondi
(2009:119) for exhibition web-presentations, which both have been illustrated in chapter 5.
The analysis was carried out on a sample of 60 EPAs – 10 for each decade –, randomly
selected among the EPA Diacorpus, keeping however an equal balance between the number of
American and British documents.
The initial stage of the move structure analysis comprised the reading of EPAs in order to
gain an overview and a general feeling of the generic elements and strategies of the genre. As a
second step, the different moves were identified and quantitatively evaluated. Quantitative data
related to the number of moves and steps across decades were gathered into a summarizing table
and a graphic representation of statistics was provided. Each decade was analyzed separately and in
order to show the moves and steps in use, relevant phrases and example sentences were extracted
from the corpus and transcribed.
While analysing moves and steps, some aspects peculiar of media discourse and press
releases in particular were identified, such as the use of quotations (Jacobs 1999a, 1999b, Sleurs et
al. 2003), and narrative sections (Bell 1991), also mentioned in chapter 5 of the present thesis. It
could be objected that both features belong to the textual sphere rather than generic structure; thus,
they recur only in certain moves, i.e. in the descriptive and central ones, so it made sense to deal
with them in the context of the structural analysis.
The use of quotations has been identified by Jacobs (1999a) as a main feature of press
releases, which he calls ‘self-reference’. By inserting quotations in EPAs, a museum may quote
itself, a member of its curatorial staff, artists and sponsors. Signalling verbatim reporting,
quotations serve to make press releases more reliable, anticipating “the typical objectivity
93
requirements of news reporting” (Jacobs 1999a: 195) and therefore are particularly appreciated by
media people, who can easily retell them in their own reporting.
Beside quotations, among journalists’ most wanted items are also stories, possibly exciting,
controversial and novel. It is with good reason that Bell (1991: 100) stressed that “journalists do not
write articles. They write stories”. In order to create the news, press release writers may combine
narrative with linguistic means of emotional appeal, which are also related to the notion of
newsworthiness (Bell 1991). EPA writers can move the interest of the readers, for instance, giving
particular evidence to the most captivating details of the biography of the artist, or telling a story
about a single work on view.
The narrative potential of EPAs was explored bearing in mind the analysis carried out by
Toolan (1988) on the basic components of the narrative – events, setting and character – and
looking for markers of affect that were felt to play a role in highlighting the news story potential of
EPAs. The analysis focused in particular on items that could be attributed to the semantic dimension
of affect "concerned with registering positive and negative feelings" identified by Martin and White
(2005: 42) in their framework for mapping attitude in English texts. Discussing the evaluative
semantics of journalistic discourse, White (2006) identifies the presence of “attitudinal
‘provocations’ - formulations where the author’s subjective presence is clearly made salient in some
way, with this subjectivity capable of being seen as directing the reader towards a particular
attitudinal assessment” (2006: 9). Martin and White (2005: 64-66) mention in particular the use of
lexical metaphors and non-core vocabulary, but also simple intensification as a means for provoking
an attitudinal response in readers.
When looking at the use of narrative, quotations and linguistic means of emotional appeal
characterizing some specific moves of EPAs, a qualitative analysis was essential. Following
Hunston (2011: 4), it may be assumed that “evaluative language is more suited to text-based than to
corpus-based enquiry”. Moreover, no set of grammatical or lexical forms could entirely encompass
the range of expressions of evaluation.
94
7.4 Summary
In the present chapter the results of a preliminary analysis carried out on the EPA Diacorpus
has been presented and the methods consequently adopted for the main analysis have been outlined.
The preliminary analysis was necessary in order to become aware of the research questions that
could prove worthy of further investigation. It turned out that the levels of vocabulary and generic
structure were particularly interesting in terms of diachronic change; consequently, the methods
applied to investigate these aspects were presented: from the identification of lexical items showing
variation or stability over time, to the exploration of their typical patterns of usage, from the
description of the move structure over time to the detection of narrative and emotional language
within the moves.
In the following two chapters the analysis will go straight to the heart of the matter, focusing
respectively on diachronic lexical variation (chapter 8) and diachronic structural variation (chapter
9) of EPAs.
95
8. Diachronic lexical variation: growth, decline and stability
In the previous chapters the focus has been on the design of the EPA Diacorpus (chapter 6)
and methods applied in the analysis (chapter 7).
It has been pointed out that the EPA Diacorpus allows a diachronic analysis of the textual
genre of EPAs both in qualitative and quantitative terms; the preliminary analysis, in particular (see
chapter 7), suggested that interesting results in linguistic but also cultural terms can be brought
about by taking into consideration the levels of vocabulary and structure.
In the present chapter the analysis focuses on lexical variation of EPAs over time. Baker’s
(2011) method to distinguish variation over time across multiple corpora was applied and particular
attention was placed on words showing frequency increases or decreases, or remaining stable over
decades1. The enquiry addressed the following research questions: (1) what lexical variation can be
identified in EPAs from the 1950s up to now? (2) has there been any language change reflecting
socio-cultural change, for instance in the way exhibitions are organized and subjects are selected?
As already anticipated in chapter 7, the twenty words of the EPA Diacorpus that show the
strongest frequency increase across the six time periods - 1950, 1960, 1970, 1980, 1990 and 2000 -
are uk, www, org, events, tickets, please, tour, tel, media, images, education, curator, admission,
contact, career, office, catalogue, students, photography and visual.
On the other hand, the twenty words that show the sharpest decreases over time are: mrs,
picture, mr, architecture, here, acquired, represented, man, shown, exhibited, shows, had, still, so,
since, famous, examples, painters, there, and country.
A further list of words showing little change over time (i.e. with less variation in their
frequencies across decades and to be identified as lockwords of the corpus) was compiled: release,
landscape, until, which, be, department, seen, form, drawings, held, great, known, paintings,
among, made, first, selected, some, director and are.
As previously pointed out in chapter 7, some irregular items, not showing a unidirectional
pattern, were not necessarily discarded from the analysis, but were taken into account in view of
their potential of mirroring cultural change related to museum settings and art in general, although,
as the analysis will show, special care needs to be taken before drawing conclusions.
1 It has been clearly pointed out that the study deals with increasing, decreasing or stable frequencies of words over
decades; however, from now on, shortcut expressions such as “the word x increases” instead of “the frequency of the
word x increases” may be used in the text for conciseness’ sake. See also Baker 2011.
96
Following Baker (2011), words under investigation were grouped into several grammatical
categories2. Results are summarized by table 8.1.
Tab. 8.1 – Summary of main findings across the EPA Diacorpus
Increased Decreased Lockwords (stable)
Auxiliary verbs had be, are
Lexical verbs contact acquired, represented, seen, held, selected,
exhibited, shown, made
shows
Lexical nouns (abstract) career, photography, examples, architecture form
media, education
Lexical nouns (concrete) office, admission, picture, man, painters, landscape, release,
tickets, images, country department, drawings,
catalogue, students, paintings, director
events, tour, curator
Adjectives visual famous great, known, first
Adverbials and pro-forms here, there, still, so
Prepositions since until, among
Determiners some
Question words which
Acronyms www, org, uk, tel
Terms of address mr, mrs
Interjections please
In the following sections each grammatical category and its related items will be analysed in
turn. More specifically, multiple concordance searches and collocational analyses of items will be
conducted in order to elicit contextual information that might explain their patterns of usage. A
2 Since the EPA Diacorpus is not marked up, the attribution of lexical items to related grammatical categories was
realized on the basis of quantitative criteria: for instance, until is here considered as a preposition, because in most of
the cases (90% of the total occurrences within the EPA Diacorpus) it identifies a preposition rather than a conjunction;
on similar reasons was based the choice of considering still as an adverbial, known as an adjective, form as a noun,
contact as a verb, and please as an interjection, since the majority of the occurrences lead that way.
97
graphic representation of frequencies across decades of each relevant lexical item will be provided.
Data will be interpreted not only in terms of linguistic variation, but also in their potential of
suggesting and explaining the great cultural changes in the field of exhibitions, museums and visual
arts in general happened from 1950 onwards.
8.1 Auxiliary verbs
With regard to the category of auxiliary verbs, three forms are taken into account: had,
which shows a pattern of decrease, although not unidirectional, are and be; the latter are both
characterised by a certain degree of stability and according to their CV score can be classified as
lockwords of the corpus. Each of these items will be explored in turn, while at the end of the section
a careful interpretation of data will be attempted.
8.1.1 had
had ranks 12th within the top twenty of the most decreasing lexical items, though showing an
irregular profile across decades of 73, 54, 31, 23, 24, 43 occurrences. Quantitatively speaking, its
presence is slightly more relevant in the American section of the corpus (136 American vs. 112
British occurrences), but frequency profiles are similar. As Figure 8.1 shows, from the eighties
onward had seems to regain ground, which makes it hard to classify this item into a definite
category.
Figure 8.1 – Frequencies of had
98
In order to explain the trend shown by had, the patterns of other forms of the verb have
within the EPA Diacorpus were examined, but only to discover that these are characterized by
irregular frequency profiles as well. The profile of has across decades, for instance, is 227, 200,
130, 124, 125, 225; that of have is 146, 114, 81, 60, 89, 149. The Time Magazine Corpus shows a
decrease of the form had over time, while in his own study on lexical variation Baker (2011)
reported its consistency.
had can be used alone, as a simple past of the verb have, or in combination with other verbs,
as an auxiliary past participle. Concordances shows that the latter construction is the most frequent
in the EPA Diacorpus: auxiliary-past participles were identified in at least two occurrences of had
out of three. The most prominent cluster is had been (38 occurrences), used for past perfect- and
past perfect continuous-constructions. The predominant use of had as an auxiliary in the EPA
Diacorpus also suggests to look at the main verbs it accompanies in the texts, in order to see if they
decrease as well; yet there are only two cases – had acquired and had been shown – where had is
associated with verbs sharing a decreasing profile over time in the corpus. It has also to be noted
that all the occurrences (14) of the construction had to + verb, referring to obligations, are restricted
to the period 1950-1970.
A common feature of the concordances is the use of had in the context of a narration of
events placed in the past, such as artist biographies or historical descriptions of art works, which
passed from hand to hand or went through renovation. See, for instance, the following examples (1):
(1)
Eynard was 63 years old and had already lived a remarkable life. He
Nauman's early works, after the artist had abandoned painting and had begun
In reality, the sculptures' vivid colors had not survived the centuries. As the
French painter in the exhibition, had his first one-man show in Paris in 1949
character. During his lifetime he had an opportunity to model some of
while a prisoner of war in Texas. He had originally studied medicine. Three
rejoined in the past; so that this panel had to be taken to pieces and remade.
These forms of narrative ekphrasis are typical features of contemporary EPAs, because they
provide journalists with a story to tell and, consequently, a newsworthy item (Lazzeretti and Bondi
2012). As a matter of fact, narrative sections are commonly identified by the use of past tenses;
thus, the decrease of had is somehow unexpected in the context of EPAs. Moreover, the analysis of
structural variation, to be carried out in the next chapter of this thesis (chapter 9), and based on the
manual observation of EPAs, shows that the use of narrative sections increased over time instead of
99
diminishing. The frequency profile of had, therefore, is particularly controversial to interpret as a
declining one.
8.1.2 are
The verb form are shows a pattern of relative stability within the EPA Diacorpus. Its
occurrences across the six decades are 255, 217, 171, 174, 207, 301 and its CV score is 22.62; it
ranks 20th within the top twenty of the most stable items in the corpus and can be therefore
classified as a lockword. The presence of are is quantitatively more relevant in the American
section of the corpus (776 American vs. 549 British occurrences); yet the Time Magazine Corpus,
mirroring American written language, provides contrasting data in respect to the EPA Diacorpus,
showing an up-and-down profile of the form are across the decades: 44,221, 55,646, 54,145,
43,694, 40,118, 30,246.
350
300
250
200
are
150
100
50
0
1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000
Figure 8.2 – Frequencies of are
The analysis of concordances shows at least two main patterns of usage for this form: in the
first place, are is used to introduce the content of the exhibition in very practical, even quantitative
terms, clearly stating what is on display, as proved by the most frequent cluster, in the exhibition
are, which totals 47 overall occurrences, but also by many other similar expressions related to art
works or artists on display, such as are shown (33 occurrences), are included (23 occurrences), are
represented (16 occurrences), are displayed (9 occurrences). The following concordances (2)
provides an overview of these typical patterns as they recur in the corpus:
100
(2)
artist's expressive capacities. Included are a large number of the whimsical
Miss, Aldo Rossi, and Robert Wilson are also included. 11 West 53 Street,
etching technique, and seven of these are being exhibited for the first time.
the originals of the plates in the book are displayed item by item on the
for communication". In this exhibition are found Mirò’s ever-present birds
young sculptors. Twelve of these are in the present exhibition, including
interpretations of the human head are represented by two crayon
the whole collection and many of them are shown in this exhibition. The
As these few lines show, are is used in the context of a description of what can be seen at
the exhibition at the current moment it is being held: a present tense is therefore required.
A second pattern of usage for are identified within the EPA Diacorpus is a prescriptive one
and is functional to the statement of specific instructions devoted to press members and visitors:
namely, it tells, for instance, where tickets are available (22 occurrences of this cluster), if
photographs are available/obtainable (18 total occurrences), if reservations are required (13
occurrences), and so on. A selection of concordances (3) illustrates this second relevant context for
are in the corpus:
(3)
under 18 years) TICKETS Tickets are available daily at the RA. To book
X 30 Black and white photographs are available to the press on request.
until 5: 00 p. m. Admission and parking are free, but advance parking
fifteenth century. Photographs are obtainable at the Information
Reservations for the lecture are required and can be made
As for prescriptive statements in general, a present tense is also here required.
The consistency of the verb form are over time, both in its descriptive and prescriptive
function, seems a consequence of the stability of two typical features of EPAs: on one hand, the
general and constant need for presentation and description of exhibiting contents; on the other, the
urge for involving relevant audiences, journalists and visitors, addressing them more or less
directly.
8.1.3 be
The infinitive form be is characterised by a pattern of stability; in fact, be is the fifth word
showing lower variance in the corpus, with 209, 294, 227, 199, 202, 287 occurrences and a CV
score of 18.25. As in the previous case of are, the presence of be is also quantitatively more
101
relevant in the American section of the corpus (767 American vs. 651 British occurrences); yet, as
in the case of are, the comparison with the Time Magazine corpus shows a different trend for be,
which is actually one of decrease in our general reference corpus.
350
300
250
200
be
150
100
50
0
1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000
Figure 8.3 – Frequencies of be
Once again, the exploration of concordances can help us gain an insight into the usage of
this form within the EPA Diacorpus. In more than a half of the occurrences (700 out of 1.100) be is
part of the cluster will be and identifies a future construction related to the next opening of the
exhibition, its planned content and its main features, as concordances below show (4).
(4)
paintings from the period will also be on view. Works have been
and Acoustiguide tapes. There will also be an academic symposium for
figures of the last ten years, will be on view at The Museum of Modern
and Gustave Le Gray). A gallery will be devoted to the 19th-century French
to be announced later).There will be a fully illustrated catalogue with
The predominant use of a future construction related to the verb be and its consistency over
time does not come as a surprise in a corpus of EPAs, given one of their most relevant
communicative purpose, which is, namely, to announce something that still has to happen. As in the
case of the verb form are, therefore, the frequency profile of be is not in contrast with the related
pattern of usage.
102
Data gathered so far for the auxiliary verb forms had, are and be cannot be easily
generalized and require a careful approach, especially in view of the irregular profile of had over
time. Yet, they are interesting because they suggest that EPAs comprise three time levels: a first
perspective is focused on the past, and it is that concerning narrative sections; a second is focused
on the present and is related mainly to presentation and description of main contents; a third is
devoted to the future, as it announces the exhibition opening and further related events. This multi-
level dimension seems to characterize EPAs since the early stages of development of this textual
genre; but while the stability of are and be over time can be explained with the consistency of their
typical patterns of usage and of their related communicative purpose – the level of descriptions and
directions for are, which require a present tense, the level of announcements for (will) be, which
requires a future tense – the supposed decrease of had is more problematic. If confirmed, a
declining trend would be in contrast with the growing importance gained by narrative sections
within EPAs (see section 9.9 of this thesis); on the contrary, it would be expected an increase of had
over time, as it actually happens, but only from the 1980s onward. A wider perspective should be
adopted in order to make sure if the verb form had is actually decreasing or increasing over time: a
quantitatively richer corpus, for instance, could offer a more clear insight into the real trend of this
form. At a more cautious level, it can be stated that EPA writers can easily manage three different
temporal levels, according to their communicative needs and that their perspective is not necessarily
centred in one dimension – present, past, or future - but combines all of them.
8.2 Lexical verbs
Within this category are the following words: contact (increased), represented, exhibited,
acquired, shown, shows (decreased), seen, held, selected, made (stable).
8.2.1 contact
The verb contact has to be considered together with the interjection please, as they build up
a frequent cluster within the EPA Diacorpus, with a total of 118 occurrences, which is, namely,
please contact. In fact, if we explore the profile of these two words across decades, we see that they
follow a similar path also in quantitative terms, to the point that their patterns could overlap: the
profile of please across the six decades is 6, 2, 22, 34, 55, 149; that of contact is 6, 4, 23, 43, 70, 84.
When the profiles of these items are compared between American and British section, no particular
103
difference is highlighted with regard to contact, while a neat predominance of the interjection
please is shown among British EPAs (215 British vs. 53 American occurrences).
160
140
120
100
80 contact
please
60
40
20
0
1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000
Figure 8.4 – Frequencies of contact, please
The phrase please contact is a distinct feature of press releases; barely attested in the Time
Magazine Corpus, where only three occurrences were identified. Used as a polite form to encourage
further contact with journalists, it is usually placed at the end of the sheet, along with the name of
the press officer in charge, his/her telephone number and e-mail address. In its most complete
version the typical phrase is for further information please contact. This pattern can be associated
with a move typical of promotional genres, the one called by Bhatia (1993, 2004) ‘soliciting
response’. This move will be fully illustrated in the following chapter of the thesis (chapter 9),
devoted to structure analysis. By the way, the increasing importance of the phrase, which occurs
only 4 times in the fifties and then gradually shifts to 17 cases in the seventies, 25 in the eighties, 30
in the nineties and 42 in the twenties, already suggests that this move gained importance over time.
It may be guessed that the response of journalists was initially solicited in a discrete way by EPAs,
while afterwards this communicative purpose became overt and consequently accepted as a
common feature of the genre of press releases.
8.2.2 represented, acquired, exhibited
The forms represented, acquired and exhibited were reunited in the analysis in consideration
of some common features. First, they all show a decreasing - although not unidirectional - pattern
104
across decades; secondly, they are all in the -ed form, as past participles or, in less cases, past
tenses, and thirdly, they are mostly used in passive constructions. Taking a closer look at
concordances, typically artists are represented and artworks are acquired or exhibited. As past
participles, these forms also appear in past passive and future passive constructions.
Figure 8.5 – Frequencies of represented, acquired, exhibited
The profile of represented across decades is 57, 22, 23, 21, 15, 25; that of exhibited is 54,
41, 18, 16, 19, 40; that of acquired is 32, 27, 10, 9, 6, 17. The most striking aspect of these patterns
is the drastic decline of the verbs between the fifties and the eighties, when they were reduced of
more than an half of their initial frequency, while, from the nineties onwards, all forms seem to
regain frequency; not enough, however, to reach their initial values, and this is the reason why they
are considered as decreasing items in the analysis despite their irregularity. A comparison between
American and British sections does not bring about significant differences in the distribution and
profile of these items across the decades, with the exception of represented, quantitatively more
relevant for the American component (105 American vs. 58 British occurrences).
It has also to be noted that other forms of the same verbs do not show a decreasing trend, but
remain rather stable, although their presence in the corpus is not particularly relevant in quantitative
terms. For instance, the third person singular of the verb represent, represents, has a total of 31
occurrences evenly balanced across decades (4, 4, 4, 4, 4, 11), as well as exhibits (21 occurrences
displayed in a consistent pattern: 3, 7, 4, 3, 3, 1). Conversely, if we exclude the form acquired, the
verb acquire is almost absent from the corpus, with a few instances of alternative forms: acquire (4)
and acquires (1).
105
On the one hand, given the specific context of EPAs, the decline of the verb acquire could
be related to economic factors, which may have implied a strict reduction of museum budgets
devoted to new acquisitions of artworks. On the other, that of represented and exhibited is more
difficult to explain. The exploration of the Time Magazine corpus does not help much in this sense,
although it shows a similar decrease of these forms, more gradual yet and more evenly distributed
across decades than in the EPA Diacorpus. This suggests that in this case we are dealing with a
major language change, which does not affect only EPAs or art discourse in general, but the media
language at a broader extent, or even the written language as a whole.
Considering the specific aim of EPAs, which is to present the exhibition in the most positive
light, to say that an artist is represented only by a series of works means, in a sense, to admit that
the overview is limited and that more would be needed in order to gain a more complete and
comprehensive idea on that artist. But that is exactly the negative message that nowadays museums
would avoid, stating preferably that visitors will be provided with an exhaustive overview on a
certain topic and no empty space will be left. The following examples (5, 6), taken from earlier
EPAs, may explain how the choice to represent an artist only with a few works may not sound fully
positive to the ears of contemporary visitors, used to ‘big things’:
(5)
The artists, each represented by three to five works, have all come into prominence during
the past ten years. Each has made a special contribution to the art of this decade.
(New York, Museum of Modern Art, The New Decade, 1 April 1955)
(6)
Another famous 15th century Florentine painter represented here only by a predella panel is
Domenico Ghirlandaio, author of the famous "Portrait of Giovanna Tornabuoni" in the
Exhibition, dated 1488. […] Venetian painting of the 15th century is splendidly represented
by Carpaccio's "Portrait of a Knight in a Landscape", which is probably the earliest full-
length portrait to have survived. Titian, Tintoretto and Veronese are each represented by
two pictures […]
(London, National Gallery, From Van Eyck to Tiepolo, 22 February 1961)
Corpus evidence shows that the taste has changed in this regard and today exhibitions aim at
covering an artistic topic in its entirety rather than narrowing the focus, which would also imply a
reduced number of works on display. The adjective comprehensive, typically modifying nouns such
106
as exhibition or retrospective, for instance, shifted from 4 to 30 occurrences between the 1950s and
the 2000s; exhaustive went from 4 to 15; major, which is also used in order to suggest importance
in terms of size and number, as in the typical cluster a major exhibition, from 14 to 61. We may
interpret these data as a reflection of a cultural change in the way exhibitions are organized,
justifying also the decrease of the word represented as a further evidence of a recent trend, which is,
namely, to insist on the ideas of comprehensiveness and exhaustiveness of exhibitions.
Observing the concordances of exhibited within the Time Magazine Corpus, a striking
aspect is that in the 1990s and the 2000s the verb seems to lose its specificity in terms of art
discourse and also its principle meaning, which is to be displayed in public, to be put on show,
especially in a museum. A further emerging meaning has not to do with artistic settings, but rather
with sanitary environments or illness: corpus evidence related to the Time Magazine Corpus shows
that in 1990s and the 2000s symptoms may be exhibited, or a clinical behavior may be exhibited, for
instance. As far as it could be possible to discover, the first occurrence of exhibited in this context
within the Time Magazine Corpus dates back to the sixties; before that, the most part of
concordances confirms that exhibited was a sort of technical expression specific for the context of
exhibitions, rarely used outside it.
Moreover, looking at other concordances dating back to seventies onwards, where the verb
is used in its metaphorical sense, for instance in the case of exhibited feelings or values, exhibited
can acquire a negative prosody, which associates the idea of exhibition to something redundant o
exaggerated. See for instance the following example (7):
(7)
Imbued with all the greed, guile and enterprise of the age, they exhibited a bullish faith in
America's future despite the depressions, strikes and financial panics that punctuated these
tumultuous years.
(The Times Magazine, Blessed Barons, by Ron Chernow, 7 December 1998)
Conversely, the noun exhibition is rarely associated to something negative, in the Times
Magazine Corpus as well as in the EPA Diacorpus. The Times Magazine Corpus provides a few
occurrences of the phrase exhibition of bad taste/bad manners as the most significant exception
within a general positive co-text of the noun, while the EPA Diacorpus provides more than 2
thousand occurrences of exhibition, with an increasing profile across decades (278, 288, 311, 350,
414, 585) all associated to positive connotations.
107
The language of EPAs may reflect the effects of a loss of specificity and possible pejorative
connotations in the meaning of the verb (and not in that of the noun), definitely dropping it in
favour of other more accurate synonyms, such as displayed, which shows a growing pattern across
decades (2, 8, 6, 6, 11, 20), installed (6, 12, 6, 3, 8, 17), featured (0,1, 3, 3, 10, 21), or of the phrases
on display (1, 4, 9, 6, 10, 12) and to be on show (0, 3, 3, 3, 13, 9). A possible conclusion of this
trend could be that EPA writers were aware of the different, subtle hues of meaning that the verb
exhibit had gained over time and went in the direction of a more technical, yet neutral lexis, which
could identify the relevant settings – in this case, an artistic context, not to be confused with other
possible environments – and avoid any negative implication.
8.2.3 shown, shows
Keeping the focus on the category of lexical verbs, among the most decreasing words in
EPA Diacorpus are also two forms related to the lemma SHOW, shown and shows. The first is
clearly the past principle of the verb show, while shows may be the plural of the noun show or the
third person of the present tense of the verb. Since EPA Diacorpus is not tagged, the distinction was
made by hand: in 35 occurrences out of 100 shows is the plural of the noun show. It means that
almost 2 out of 3 occurrences are related to the verb, which then plays the most important role. We
are therefore authorized to consider both entries, shown and shows, as mainly belonging to the
verbal derivation of the lemma SHOW.
Since the action of putting on display something to be judged by the public – i.e. to show it -
is typical of exhibitions, the decrease of these words over time is somehow unexpected in an
exhibition press releases corpus and needs to be further explained. The first check was on the
frequency and consistency profile of both lexical items.
108
Figure 8.6 – Frequencies of shown, shows
Shown has a total of 304 occurrences in the corpus, 144 belonging to the American
component and 160 to the British component. Its profile is characterized by a rather irregular
decrease over the six decades (95, 72, 32, 27, 42, 36) and its CV score is 53.10. The most frequent
three-word cluster related to shown in the corpus is the future construction will be shown. Similarly,
shows, with a total of 100 occurrences (37 British, 63 American), has an irregular decreasing profile
(29, 24 ,15, 7, 10, 15) and its CV score is 50.15. Typical patterns in the corpus are the exhibition
shows, the painting shows, the section shows, followed by descriptions of art works.
I looked at other forms of the verb show in the corpus, in order to find out if there is a
general decrease of its use. The frequency list, alphabetically ordered, provided the following
entries: show (291), showcase (3), showcases (3), showcasing (4), showed (10), showing (94).
Show is rather consistent in terms of frequency (68, 50, 47, 35, 37, 54). It has the same
ambiguity as shows, but the manual inspection reveals a reverse tendency: two occurrences out of
three refer to the noun, which is a synonym of exhibition. The verbal component is therefore less
relevant in this case.
The word-family of showcase has a total of 10 occurrences in the corpus, all concentrated in
the 1990s and in the 2000s: it is therefore a more recent lexical input and does not tell us much in
terms of variation.
Showed is used very little and is even absent in 2000’s EPAs (its profile is 4,1,1,3,1,0),
while showing is more stable across decades (17, 10, 19, 18, 14, 16).
So far we could make only educated guesses as to why the verb show is decreasing over
time in the EPA Diacorpus. The Time Magazine Corpus was therefore explored for comparison.
109
The past participle of the verb, shown, significantly decreases across decades even in the Time
corpus (1,036, 1,046, 809, 586, 498, 408), as does the simple past showed (2,889, 2,145, 1,590,
1,370, 1,029, 714). Showing also decreases (1,136, 1,031, 820, 676, 617, 472).The same is true for
the infinite form (2,447, 2,244,1,875, 1,708, 1,708, 1,320) and the present third person of the verb
(1,144, 1,180, 1,034, 878, 1,070, 742). Therefore the results of the EPA Diacorpus with regard to
the verb show and its decreasing tendency over time mirror – obviously in a smaller dimension –
those of a wider, general corpus, specialized in the language of news.
As already pointed out, the verb show has two main meanings in the EPA Diacorpus: the
first and more relevant is associated with the action of exhibiting something, while the second is
functional to descriptions. In 160 out of 570 occurrences identified within the EPA Diacorpus, show
is used to introduce the description of an art work: a picture, a portrait, a painting, etc.
If it is hard to explain why the verb show decreases over time in its first, basic meaning, a
guess may be formulated with regard to the second function. When describing art works – a picture,
for instance - the use of the verb show would imply a sort of mediation, a filter between the writer
and the reader. This mediation requires not only a more complex syntactical structure to decode, but
also a further conceptual step for the reader, which is to imagine the act of showing the picture
before the picture in itself. It can be guessed that art descriptions have become more direct over
time and filtering verbs, which may somehow distance the readers from art works, have been
gradually reduced in the language of EPAs. In other words, instead of describing what a picture
shows, it seemed preferable to tell directly how it looks.
The difference between these two different techniques for describing artworks – indirect and
direct – can be summarized by the following examples taken from EPA Diacorpus:
(8)
This skeletal drawing shows us how the artist went about his task, working out the
perspective framework with the ruler and pencil and afterwards filling in the details in ink,
underneath which the vanishing point and vanishing lines are still clearly visible.
(London, Victoria&Albert Museum, Drawings by Italian Artists: 1500-1800, 1 June 1959)
(9)
The luminous colour and lively brushwork of the picture evoke the hot, hazy atmosphere of
a summer afternoon. This is the world of the Impressionists and the scene is
uncompromisingly contemporary. But the isolation and gravity of the figures, the scale of
the painting and the classical order of the composition come from a very different world - a
tradition stretching back to the Renaissance. The result is at once serene and subversive.
(London, The National Gallery, Seurat and the Bathers, 1 March 1997)
110
In the first extract (8) the writer is present in the text in his authorial stance, identified by the
pronoun us, establishing common ground between him and his audience; he directs the reader’s
gaze, guiding him by pointing to some details of the picture and providing a description of the
artist’s work; the effect is yet explanatory rather than captivating. In the second extract (9), where
the description of the art work is offered without a filtering verb, the reader has the impression of
really being there, in front of the picture, in a sort of virtual ‘walk’ through the exhibition.
8.2.4 seen, held, selected
The forms seen, held, selected all present a pattern of stability, as shown by the graphic
representation (Figure 8.7), and can be reunited in the analysis. Moreover, their performances do
not differ between American and British section of the corpus
40
35
30
25
seen
20
held
15
selected
10
5
0
1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000
Figure 8.7 – Frequencies of seen, held, selected
Ranking 7th within the list of lockwords, seen has 173 overall occurrences and the following
profile across the six decades: 30, 31, 24, 23, 27, 38. Its variance score is 19.05.
The consistency of the past participle of the verb see - a perception verb connected to vision
and therefore functional to descriptions – dose not come as a surprise for a corpus of EPAs. It is
involved in a series of frequent, descriptive clusters, such as be seen in (25 occurrences),
rarely/never/seldom been seen (17), as seen in (10 ), be seen at (7). The second among them, in
particular, is typically used by contemporary EPA writers in order to pursue a strategy of novelty
(Lazzeretti and Bondi 2012), an aspect crucial in order to make an exhibition appealing and to
111
attract audiences. When deciding to visit and review an art show, a journalist expects to see
something original, which has never been on view before, or, at least, not in the most recent years.
Thus, the observation of EPAs from a diachronic perspective shows that this strategy does not
belong to our times, but was already applied in the fifties: its first occurrence, within EPA
Diacorpus, can be found in an American EPA dating back to 1956:
(10)
Nine paintings by Walter Richard Sickert (1860-1942), a pupil of Whistler's whose work has
seldom been seen in this country, are shown.
(New York, Museum of Modern Art, Masters of British Painting, 1 October 1956)
Furthermore, a comparison with the Time Magazine Corpus shows that evaluative phrases
based on the construct adverb + been seen are a distinct feature of EPAs, since their frequency in
the news language conversely decreases from 29 occurrences in the 1950s to 9 in the 2000s.
Ranking 10th within the list of lockwords, held has 141 overall occurrences and the
following profile across the six decades: 22, 21, 18, 28, 21, 31. Its variance score is 20.98. This
result is not unexpected too, in consideration that the verb hold is a sort of technical word used by
EPA writers to localize an exhibition (or a collateral event) and state where it takes place. See the
following concordances (11):
(11)
the series of small exhibitions to be held in the new Board Room
A final showing will be held in Barcelona under the sponsorship
Two separate retrospectives have been held at the Louvre in Paris, in 1955
98 out of 118 occurrences of held within the corpus relate to this pattern; to be held is,
namely, the exhibition, or an event linked to it. Once again, we are in front of a distinct feature of
the language EPAs, because the Time Magazine corpus gives evidence of a decreasing pattern of
held over time when the nouns exhibition, show or retrospective are selected as collocates.
The consistency of patterns related to the lockword held in the EPA Diacorpus can be read
as an attempt to keep a sort of conventional, specialized language for EPAs over time, in order to
make them more recognizable as a genre. This need for a neutral, specialized lexis, quite a jargon
sometimes, is a recursive element in the lexical analysis of EPAs. It has been already pointed out,
for instance, that the verb display seems more successful then exhibit over time (see section 8.2.2),
in view of its specificity.
112
Ranking 17th within the list of lockwords, selected has 123 overall occurrences and the
following profile: 14, 26, 23, 16, 23, 21. Its variance score is 22.41. To be selected, rather
obviously, are the works on display (see example 12), but also the artists.
(12)
The two hundred items of infinitely rare jewellery selected from the Gillian Sackler
collection date from antiquity to the 12th Century A. D.
(London, Royal Academy of Arts, Jewels of the Ancients, 1 May 1987)
As in the previous case of seen and held, the data from the Time Magazine Corpus related to
selected are in contrast with those of the EPA Diacorpus: a sharp decline of this verb form is shown
by the Time, also in its technical usage, when works, pictures, pieces and other nouns identifying
artworks are present in the immediate co-text. Conversely, the consistency of selected over time in
the EPA Diacorpus may be traced back to a strategy which highlights the quality of the exhibition
by stating that a choice has been made among many other works (or artists) available. A strategy we
are going to encounter when exploring the use of other lockwords of the EPA Diacorpus, the
adverbial among (section 8.7.1) and the determiner some (section 8.8)
8.2.5 made
To conclude our overview of lexical verbs showing increase, decrease, or remaining stable
within the EPA Diacorpus, the form made is left to be analysed.
made has 369 overall occurrences (235 American, 134 British) and an irregular profile
across decades: 55, 60, 42, 63, 65, 84. Due to its variance score (22.36), it ranks 15th within the list
of lockwords, though its pattern is a controversial one. To be noted, in particular, is the drastic
increase of occurrences between the 1990s and the 2000s.
113
90
80
70
60
50
40 made
30
20
10
0
1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000
Figure 8.8 – Frequencies of made
A cluster seems to play a significant role, made possible, which has 60 occurrences,
distributed across decades in the following sequence: 2, 3, 4, 23, 19, 11. The phrase is definitely
more relevant for the American section of the corpus, since 49 occurrences out of 60 belong to
American EPAs, and can be considered a distinct feature of EPAs, because it is related to the
mention of sponsors and donors who made possible the exhibition. Its up-and-down profile across
the decades may reflect a growing commercial concern, more evident in the 1980s and the 1990s
and related in particular to American environments.
(13)
The New York presentation of the exhibition is made possible through the generosity of the
Fellows of The Frick Collection.
(New York, Frick Collection, Seventeenth Century Chinese Porcelain, 21 May 1990)
The mention of sponsors within the text of EPAs is a sort of reward in terms of image that
sponsors can rely on and explicitly ask for in return of their financial support. Furthermore,
sponsors often want to proofread the EPA before its release in order to check if they have been
properly mentioned in the text and the logo is reproduced according to their standards.
114
8.3 Lexical nouns (abstract)
Within this category are career, photography, media, education (increased), examples,
architecture (decreased), form (stable).
8.3.1 career
Showing a clear pattern of growth across decades (0, 11, 8, 27, 34, 49), the word career is
one of the most interesting cases of the EPA Diacorpus. It has 129 overall occurrences, quite evenly
distributed between the American (71) and British (58) sections.
Figure 8.9 – Frequencies of career
The Time Magazine Corpus was explored for comparison, in order to find out if the word
gained increasing importance over time in the language of general media as well, but the result was
reversed: career shifted from 1,904 occurrences in the year 1950 to 1,022 occurrences in the year
2000. The increasing trend of career seems therefore a distinct feature of the EPA Diacorpus.
A manual inspection of concordances shows that the career in question is always that of the
artist/s featured in the exhibition. The most frequent three-word clusters associated with career in
the corpus are of his career (where the adjective his refers anaphorically or cataphorically to the
artist), of the artist’s career, the artist’s career and throughout his career. The latter cluster
introduces the idea of a long-lasting progress through the artist’s lifework, which is also stressed by
other evaluative expressions, as in the following concordances (14):
115
(14)
covering all stages of Mirò's long career will be included,
extraordinarily rich and prolific career. On view through May 2,
every phase of his seventy-year career. Wright is shown to be
In some rarer cases the artist’s career may be early or brief, due to biographical
circumstances, but the semantic prosody of the term sounds positive:
(15)
Schiele, and, in an even briefer career, created such dramatic
work from the artist's early career stand out as of particular
Although the positive semantic prosody associated with the noun career may seem obvious,
the reason for the increasing use of the term over time is worth investigating. We would perhaps
expect the frequency of other positively evaluated and career-related words to increase as well in
the EPA Diacorpus. Other from the frequency list that convey positive meaning, especially with
regard to the life-work of an artist, are the nouns master and success, and the adjectives famous,
known and great. Master and success do not even fall within the cut-off of the 326 most frequent
words in the corpus, since they have less than 100 occurrences across all decades. They are
therefore indistinctive in terms of variation, due to their limited presence. Conversely, famous has a
more relevant presence in the corpus, with a total of 142 occurrences, but a gradually decreasing
profile across decades (35, 32, 16, 19, 26, 13), whereas the adjectives great and known are not only
stable, but also quantitatively relevant. Great (235 occurrences) is the 11th word showing less
variation across decades according to its CV score, with a profile across decades of 37, 30, 32, 39,
45, 52, and can therefore be classified as a lockword. Similarly, known (202) ranks 12th among
lockwords, with a profile across decades of 41, 39, 26, 34, 24, 38. It has to be noted that all these
adjectives, famous, great and known, have decreasing patterns in the Time Magazine Corpus.
A close examination of the concordances related to famous, great and known was therefore
required. Only 16 occurrences of the adjective famous out of 142 were clearly related to artists,
since the majority describes their works, or a collection, or, in a smaller number of cases, it defines
a group of people (the famous) often portrayed by art. Similarly, only 27 occurrences of the
adjective great out of 235 directly describe artists, while most of the instances address art works, art
movements, collections and exhibitions. The adjective known is no exception to this pattern, with
only a third of the occurrences (202) related to artists, especially those combined with adverbials,
such as well known, best known, internationally known, little known, lesser known.
116
A first conclusion could be that any evaluation in terms of fame and greatness is preferably
addressed to art works and to the relevant artistic context in general, rather than to the artist himself
as a person. This tendency is quite stable across decades, although the use of the adjective famous is
decreasing, maybe because of its controversial semantic prosody. After Andy Warhol’s 1968 quote
("In the future, everyone will be world-famous for 15 minutes”) the idea of fame, especially with
regard to art, began to carry some disregarded aspects, such as the dissipation of hierarchies and its
logical extension that everybody could be famous, and not merely those individuals really worthy of
fame (Buchloh 2001).
Conversely, the idea of career as an asset strictly related to the artist became more and more
valuable over time, to the point that it can give a justifying reason for the exhibition itself. In other
words, we might say that the artist’s career has become a preliminary condition for giving him
space within a museum and celebrating his work with an exhibition. Youth, as a consequence, is not
particularly valuable in this regard, and for a young artist it is very difficult to emerge in the art
scene (see McCarthy et al. 2001). The EPA Corpus confirms the tendency, with less than 10
instances of the expression young artist/s, 18 occurrences of the noun youth and the hapax
legomenon youthful.
8.3.2 photography, architecture, media
The nouns photography, architecture and media were reunited in the analysis, because, with
more or less specificity, they all identify exhibition topics or channels of expression used by artists.
Figure 8.10 – Frequencies of photography, architecture
117
The increase of photography and the wavering of architecture can be read as a reflection of
the emergence of new visual languages, acknowledged as art forms by museums and audiences, but
also as a sign of changing tastes of both museum visitors and curatorial staff.
The noun photography ranks 19th within the top twenty of the most increasing words across
decades; its profile - 4, 22, 32, 59, 71, 80 occurrences – shows a clear pattern of growth.
Conversely, architecture ranks 4th within the most decreasing words according to its CV score, but
it is characterized by an irregular profile of 29, 6, 7, 15, 40, 17 occurrences across decades. Our
reference general corpus, the Time Magazine, reflects a peak in the frequency of photography in the
1970s, since its profile across decades is 133, 166, 252, 196, 112, 91, and one in the 1960s for
architecture (339, 387, 188, 262, 150, 130).
The acknowledgement of photography as an art is traditionally linked to the work of the
American photographer Alfred Stieglitz (1864 – 1946), who struggled to establish photography as a
valid form of artistic expression (Rosenblum 2007). Thus it was only in 1937, when the first major
exhibition on photography was organized in the United States by Beaumont Newhall at the
Museum of Modern Art - "Photography, 1839- 1937", a staple for the history of this medium – that
photography gained widespread recognition as an art. A year later Newhall was appointed Moma’s
first curator of photography and a Department of Photography was founded: this was a further
tribute and a sign of official recognition with regard to this medium, coming from the museum
establishment (Rosenblum 2007). This also explains why photography has been mentioned within
American EPAs since the fifties, while if we look at British EPAs, in the sixties the noun was still
used in a completely different accepted sense (16):
(16)
Members of the press may preview this Exhibition on Thursday, 29th August from 2.30 to
4.00 p.m. on production of this press notice. Photography is not permitted in the Board
Room.
(London, National Gallery, Canaletto Bicentenary Exhibition, 26th August, 1968)
Nonetheless, British museums were becoming aware of the increasing interest in
photography, as shown in an EPA issued by the Victoria&Albert Museum, on the occasion of an
exhibition on Henri Cartier-Bresson, which sounds as a sort of justification addressed to the press
(17):
118
(17)
The connection of the Victoria and Albert Museum with the field of photography,
considered at large as a branch of the visual arts, is not known to a wide public. But its
Library houses a notable collection of Victorian photographs; and the Museum mounted the
official Centenary exhibition of the Invention of Photography in 1939.
(London, Victoria&Albert Museum, Henri Cartier-Bresson, 1st January, 1969).
The trend related to the noun architecture plays a more significant role in the American
section of EPA Diacorpus, since 100 occurrences of the word out of 114 belong to that part.
Concordances show a major interest in this discipline during the nineties, where most of the
occurrences of architecture (34) are concentrated, in correspondence with great exhibitions on
masters such as Alvar Aalto and Frank Lloyd Wright. The number of concordances falls drastically
in the following decade, where only 3 occurrences of architecture as a field of interest for
exhibitions were retrieved, although architecture is not the main topic of the show, but rather a
marginal part. Although this decreasing trend could be biased by the composition of the EPA
Diacorpus – EPAs were selected randomly in order to gain the widest and the most general
overview on the genre, without selecting topics – the gradual disappearance of the noun
architecture from 1990 onwards may suggests at least two conclusions: in the first place, it could
reflect the growing difficulties, in technical and economical terms, faced by museums in organizing
architectural exhibitions, which is a fact, as well as the reduced opportunities to appoint an architect
for renovation projects within the museum due to the high costs of these interventions; on the other
hand, this trend could be related to the perception of architecture as a very specialized field of
interest and therefore as a more complex and less appealing topic for an exhibition addressed to the
general public.
The analysis of another increasing abstract noun within the corpus, media, allows to
recognize a further trend with regard to criteria selection, and namely the importance of putting on
display a variety of different items and topics. As shown by its graphic representation, the pattern
of media is of 7, 6, 3, 9, 24, 53 occurrences across the six decades; its CV score is 112.41 and
consequently this noun ranks 9th among the most increasing ones. As in the previous cases –
photography, architecture – the noun is quantitatively more relevant in American EPAs (87
American vs. 13 British occurrences). media sharply increases in the Time Magazine corpus too,
shifting from less than 100 occurrences in the 1950s to more than 1,000 in the 2000s, although the
term is mostly used to refer to address the newspapers, television, and radio in this general corpus.
119
Figure 8.11 – Frequencies of media
The term identify press members also in the EPA Diacorpus, as testified by almost 20
occurrences of expressions such as media preview and media contact/s, but a close look at
concordances shows that in most of the cases the noun relates to art techniques and especially to
those of most recent invention, such as photography and video:
(18)
A color film is to be made of the image and the resultant movie will be projected of the wall
next to the original image. Serra says that "the media is the subject rather than the light."
(Chicago, Museum of Contemporary Art, Art by Telephone, 23 October 1969)
Moreover, the noun often appears in the following combinations, suggesting an idea of
variety and richness of contents:
(19)
has developed a multivalent and multi- media art form that addresses
vehicles for photography. The new media brought images of fame
bronze, polished aluminum and mixed media, frequently using complex
experimented with a broad range of media. In 1928, he executed his first
represent Bearden's work in a variety of media, including watercolors, oils, and
collection of works of art in all media is on view. The Museum is open
about twenty-five works in a variety of media: oils, pastels, etchings
120
The increasing frequency of the noun media in the context here outlined – that of a rich and
various selection of items on display – suggest a further cultural trend for museums, which is to
ensure a variety of media, historical periods, objects and subjects.
8.3.3 examples, form
examples shows an irregularly decreasing pattern, since its frequency profile across the six
decades is 30, 16, 9, 19, 21, 15. It has a total of 110 occurrences (68 American, 42 British) and a
CV score of 38.36. examples irregularly decreases in the Time Magazine corpus too: 336, 276, 304,
202, 175, 69.
Figure 8.12 – Frequencies of examples
As it could be easily expected, in the language of EPAs the pieces on display are defined as
examples of something: of the whole body of work of an artist, of an artistic current or a movement,
of the content of a collection, and so on. The following concordances (20) make clear this pattern
usage:
(20)
of China in 1949. It features major examples of socialist realism,
five paintings, including some fine examples by Renoir, Cezanne and Pissarro.
Europe and Japan including important examples from the collections of some
121
In the reported concordances the semantic prosody associated with the noun examples is
positive; yet, EPA writers seem to use this definition in a discontinuous way across the decades.
The reason behind this discontinuity could be similar to that provided for the decline of another
word which has already been dealt with in the analysis, represented (see section 8.2.2). Namely, it
could be related to the concern of providing an exhaustive overview on the topic featured by the
exhibition, with plenty of artworks on display, rather than suggesting a glimpse of it through a set of
examples. In fact, the word examples can evoke the idea of a limited selection among a wider field
of possibilities that have not been fully exploited. It has to be noted that, while in some cases
selectiveness is marked by EPAs as a value and is associated with a positive feature of the
exhibition, as the consequence of an authoritative curatorial choice, in other it can sound as a
consequence of a real lack of contents. Slight nuances of meaning are here indeed involved; yet,
EPA writers seem to be aware of them. Moreover, in view of similar cases already highlighted in
the analysis of lexical variation of time (see, for instance, represented in section 8.2.2), this need for
disambiguation has not be underestimated.
As for the second item belonging to the category of abstract nouns, form, a pattern of
relative stability has to be noted. It has a total of 151 occurrences in the corpus (100 American, 51
British), and its profile across the decades is 28, 26, 16, 23, 29, 29, while the CV score is 20.01.
Conversely, the noun decreases in the Time Magazine corpus.
Figure 8.13 – Frequencies of form
122
The most frequent cluster related to form is the form of, with 13 occurrences, typically
followed by nouns specifying the technique it has been used to create the described artwork, as the
following concordances (21) show:
(21)
brilliant and interesting work in the form of sketches, were too completely
American cinema is presented in the form of film, original designs, sketches
documentation of Klein’s life in the form of photographs, letters and
Also typical is the combination art form, with 18 overall occurrences, identifying a
technique or a new art medium, such as photography, ceramics, posters and many other that need to
be expressly defined as art forms because their status is under debate or has still to be fully
acknowledged. In the following example, for instance, body art is introduced for the first time as a
topic for exhibitions (22):
(22)
Bodyworks, the new and controversial art form in which the artist uses his own body as his
art work, will be surveyed for the first time in America at the Museum of Contemporary Art.
(Chicago, Museum of Modern Art, Bodyworks, 27th February, 1975)
The noun form is also used in the corpus in some recurrent, formulaic binomials such as
form and content (3 occurrences), form and light (2 occurrences), form and structure (2
occurrences):
(23)
Rodin opened the channels for the form and content of modern sculpture"
involves the use of mirrors, form and light to create optical illusions
the late abstractions. Cubist form and structure gave way to biomorphic
In order to explain the consistency of this noun over time, the argumentation can follow
what has to be pointed out for other lockwords of the corpus (see, for instance, the cases of held in
section 8.2.4): namely, some items can be regarded as part of the specialized lexis of art discourse,
one of the most relevant domains for EPAs. EPA writers, in particular, share a sort of lexical
heritage they contribute to shape, through their selection, and pass on to colleagues over time. To a
123
certain extent, the usage of some specialized or technical words is normally expected to be stable
over time; the stability of the noun form over time in a corpus specialized in art discourse, in
particular, seems quite self-explanatory: how could ever an art exhibition ignore this notion?
Nonetheless, the analysis shows that even technical words may follow increasing or decreasing
trends in the EPA Diacorpus (see the decrease of exhibited, in section 8.2.2 and the increase of
visual in section 8.5.1 ), so that each case is worthy of investigation and has to be examined per se.
8.3.4 education
With regard to the abstract noun education, the analysis is carried out in association with
that of the concrete noun events because they are both used in the context of collateral programmes
thematically linked to the exhibition (see section 8.4.3).
8.4 Lexical Nouns (concrete)
Within the category of lexical concrete nouns that showed patterns of increase, decrease, or
stability, are office, admission, tickets, images, media, catalogue, students, events, curator, tour
(increased), picture, man, painters, country (decreased), landscape, release, department, drawings,
paintings, director (stable).
8.4.1 office, department
The nouns office and department were reunited in the analysis because both identify
working divisions and professional roles within museum environments.
124
Figure 8.14 – Frequencies of office, department
In this case, a comparison with the Time Magazine corpus would add very little to the
analysis, since these terms are genre-specific and, by the way, in the general reference corpus office
and department decrease rather than increase. Let us focus therefore on EPA Diacorpus evidence.
The word office has 139 overall occurrences. Its profile shows a clear and continuous
increase from 1950 onwards (0, 5, 22, 35, 49, 51), although the CV score (80.50) ranks it only 37th.
It comes as no surprise for a corpus of press releases that in the majority of the occurrences
(100 over 139) this item is part of the expression press office.
As already pointed out, press offices took off in American museums and were created only
subsequently in British museums, as a consequence of the earlier development of public relations in
the United States. It seems, nonetheless, that they became more important across British rather than
American museums over time. As a matter of fact, 99 occurrences of the expression press office
belong to the British section, starting from a National Gallery’s EPA dating 1970, while only one
American EPA, belonging to the Museum of Modern Art and dating 1999, provides the mention of
a press office at the end of the sheet. Conversely, American EPAs show a preference for expressions
such as contact, immediately contact, for further information contact, media contact, press contact,
or simply for further information, followed by colon and name of the press officer in charge. This
basic format, in its many variants, was retrieved in the majority of American EPAs and already
from the 1950s. It becomes common in British EPAs as well, but only from the 1970s onwards. It
can be therefore pointed out that American EPAs show an earlier personalization of the press
officer’s work, expressed through a marked signature. However, in the United States, since the
1950s the press officer’s job was not merely associated with a press office, as concordances show,
125
but rather with a more complex structure, such as a department of public affairs, of public
information or of communications. With regards to British environments, similar departments are
mentioned in the corpora only from 1969 in Victoria&Albert Museum’s EPAs, where press officers
were working first within a department of public relations and subsequently within a department of
museum services. The word department is one of the lockwords of the corpus, with a rather
consistent profile of 23, 30, 32, 29, 40, 37; 2 out of 3 occurrences belong to the American corpus.
A possible way of interpreting the data at the broadest level is that EPAs were seen by
Americans museums, since their very first origin, as a tool of a wider and integrated communication
system, which could not be limited to the relationship with journalists tout court but also involved
further levels, inside the museum (i.e. the other departments) and outside the museum (i.e. the
general public).
8.4.2 admission, tickets, students
As introduced in the first chapter of the thesis (section 1.1), at a certain point of their
development, and in particular from the eighties onwards, EPAs began to reflect economic
concerns, as a consequence of the changed financial situation and overall rising of prices. The
contribution of public funds to museums remained static or fell, so that museum governing bodies
and directors had to seek funding from alternative sources.
The increasing frequency profile of words like admission, tickets and students in the EPA
Diacorpus are reflective of the introduction of visitor fees, which became a necessity for many
institutions, but also of the need to differentiate them for some segments of audiences, i.e students,
according to their age and other characteristics. Moreover, as a part of their marketing strategy,
museums started to offer discounts or free admission on certain days of the week. To reinforce the
intuition that the trends related to these nouns are a distinct feature of the EPA Diacorpus is the
observation of the data derived from the Time Magazine corpus, where admission, tickets and
students are characterized by an opposite, downward profile.
In the following figure (Figure 8.15) a graphic representation of the increasing trend of the
nouns admission and tickets is provided. Their profiles across the six decades are respectively 2, 7,
44, 33, 66, 121 and 1, 2, 2, 12, 31, 75.
126
Figure 8.15 – Frequencies of admission, tickets
Corpus evidence shows that one occurrence out of three of the noun admission, as well as
three occurrences out of four of the noun tickets, belong to British EPAs: this suggests that the
opportunity whether to charge or not admission is particularly relevant in Britain, where free
museums are a long-time tradition. The British Museum, for instance, opened for free in 1759 as in
the original intentions of its founder, the collector Hans Sloan: it was meant to “all persons desirous
of seeing and viewing the [collections]” and for “satisfying the desires of the curious, as for the
improvement, knowledge and information of all persons” (Sloane 1753). Since then, the issue of
free access to museums has been under debate (see chapter 1).
The noun admission does not necessarily imply a visitor fee; in almost 50 occurrences the
word is actually used to signal a free entrance to the exhibition, as in the following example (24):
(24)
A small exhibition of 17th century Dutch townscape paintings from the National Gallery
collection will be on view in the Board Room from Friday, 15th February until Sunday, 24th
March, 1974. Admission to the exhibition will be free.
(London, National Gallery, Dutch Townscape Painting, 11 February 1974)
Conversely, other collocates of admission in the corpus confirm the idea that a fee is
required: for instance, charge/s (20 occurrences), price/s (18), and, of course, ticket/s (4). The noun
is also often used to signal the museum closing time, as shown by the cluster last admission
followed by a specific hour of the day, generally in the evening (46 occurrences).
127
Let us move on to the analysis of another noun involved in admission policies, students.
This ranks 18th in the list of the most increasing lexical items of the corpus; its profile across
decades is 0, 13, 17, 23, 28, 43, while its CV score is 68.34. It has a total of 167 occurrences, more
than a half belonging to the American section of the corpus.
Figure 8.16 – Frequencies of students
The noun students appears for the first time in the sixties among American EPAs; from the
seventies onward it can be found also in the British ones. The analysis of concordances shows that
from a certain point of their development, to be placed approximately in the sixties, museums began
to consider students as strategic visitors, to be targeted and addressed by special reduction policies.
EPAs served indeed as a communicative tool for spreading the news about these policies through
media.
The following example (25) illustrates how information on visitor fees can be structured in
an EPA. It is placed at the very beginning of the press release, right after the title, and takes into
account different categories, namely students, children, pensioners, groups, etc:
(25)
LANDSCAPE MASTERPIECES FROM SOVIET MUSEUMS
18th October - 30th November 1975
Press View: Thursday 16th October from 10 - 5.30 pm
Private View: Friday 17th October from 2—7 pm
Admission: 50p (30p Mondays); half price students, children, pensioners, group visits etc.
Hours: Monday — Saturday 10—6 pm Sunday 2—6 pm
(London, Royal Academy of Arts, Masterpieces from Soviet Museums, 1 October 1975)
128
The growing need for differentiating visitor fees according to their status is reflected in the
corpus by an increasing frequency of nouns identifying specific categories of audience, namely
children (10, 5, 3, 17, 31, 27), pensioners (0, 0, 0, 6, 8, 1), seniors (0, 0, 0, 0, 10, 11), disabled (0, 0,
0, 8, 8, 17) and members (13, 18, 11, 15, 16, 21).
8.4.3 events, education
The analysis of the concrete noun events is carried out along with that of the abstract noun
education, because both words relate to the same concept and namely are involved with the
organisation of collateral initiatives linked to the exhibition. Moreover, both nouns share an
increasing trend over time, as shown by Figure 8.17, and their presence in the corpus is similar also
in quantitative terms, since they total respectively 100 and 106 overall occurrences.
Figure 8.17 – Frequencies of education, events
The noun events ranks 4th in the list of the most increasing lexical items of the corpus in
view of its high CV score, 141.83; its profile across the six decades is 3, 7, 7, 5, 16, 68. Most
occurrences (77 out of 106) belong to American EPAs.
The noun education ranks 11th among the most increasing items over time. Its CV score is
103.90, while its profile across the six decades is 3, 3, 2, 16, 38, 38. Occurrences are evenly
distributed between the two components of the corpus (48 American, 52 British).
129
Once again we are in front of distinct trends of the EPA Diacorpus, since our general
reference corpus, the Time Magazine, show opposite, downward profiles for the frequencies of
these nouns over time.
The rise of education and events has to be put in relation to the increasing importance
gained by educational purposes pursued by museums and exhibitions but also to marketing
strategies aiming at widening the number of potential visitors: education programmes and collateral
events thematically linked to the exhibition, such as lectures, films, artist talks, guided tours, etc,
can attract a wider public interested in different aspects touched by the exhibition and not simply art
lovers.
Corpus evidence shows that museums have been involved in this trend at least from the
sixties, although the real exploit of collateral events can be placed between the seventies and the
eighties.
The analysis of concordances of the word events, for instance, shows that most occurrences
are linked to a programme of collateral initiatives (and programme, in fact, is the most frequent
collocate of this noun in the corpus). events began to be used in a cultural context of lectures,
concerts, workshops, and other similar initiatives, in the seventies and more often among American
EPAs, while British EPAs absorbed this trend later. The first relevant occurrence of events carrying
this meaning can be found in an EPA dating back to 1974 and issued by the New York Solomon R.
Guggenheim Museum. In this case, reported below (example 26), the mention of a collateral
programme appears at the end of the EPA, but this kind information could also be incorporated in
the text:
(26)
Several special events will take place in the museum auditorium in conjunction with the
Guggenheim show.
(New York, The Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum, Jesus Rafael Soto Exhibition, 28
October 1974)
With regard to the noun education, concordances shows that in a first phase it was used very
little and limited to the identification of expert roles or special departments within the museum: for
instance, the ‘Department of Public Relations and Education’ running in the fifties at the
Victoria&Albert Museum, or the ‘Curator of Education’ in charge at the Guggenheim in the sixties;
from the eighties, a new cluster emerges with growing frequency across decades, education
programme/s, totalling 16 overall occurrences concentrated between 1980 and 2003. Under this
130
expression are gathered a series of thematic events – films, lectures, guided tours, artist talks -
organised by museums in order to provide a more complete understanding of the exhibition.
Nonetheless, as already pointed out, these initiatives do not pursue only cultural and educational
purposes, but also aim at widening the audience and selling more tickets.
8.4.4 country, tour
Although seemingly these nouns do not share any common point, it is worth considering
them together in the analysis, as they relate to a cultural trend that involved museums from the
eighties onward and that, to a certain extent, can be put in relation to the wider phenomenon of
globalization: the feasibility of travelling an exhibition (Lord and Lord 2002), which has become
increasingly important over time, since most museums need to recover the rental costs at a
minimum.
Data regarding the frequency profiles of these nouns are the following: tour has 3, 5, 4, 8,
33, 51 occurrences across decades; it ranks 7th among the most increasing items of the corpus in
view of its high CV score, 115.42; conversely, country is the 20th most decreasing item in the
corpus, with a CV score of 31.99, and its profile across decades is of 32, 26, 25, 25, 18, 11
occurrences. It is also worth noticing that, with regard to both nouns, tour and country, lexical
change intervenes with major evidence between the eighties and the twenties: occurrences of tour
go from 8 to 55, those of country from 25 to 11. No particular difference is highlighted by
comparing the frequency profiles of these items between the American and British sections of the
corpus. In the case of tour and country, as for many nouns already encountered in the analysis,
results from the Time Magazine corpus contrast to those provided by the EPA Diacorpus: tour
decreases, while country has a peak in the 1970s and than sharply decreases in the general corpus.
131
Figure 8.18 – Frequencies of tour, country
Concordances allow to recognize the patterns of usage of both items. With regard to tour it
has to be pointed out that 3 occurrences out of 4 relate to the idea of a travelling or touring
exhibition, while the rest refers to guided tours, i.e. collateral activities addressed to visitors which
belong to the series of events – another increasing item of the corpus – already encountered in the
analysis (section 8.4.3). It has been stressed that these programmes have become increasingly
important for museums in terms of promotional tools; yet, there is a further reason for the growth of
the noun tour over time and it comes from the opportunity museums have to host exhibitions that
are fully developed and designed and to travel among different, international venues. This choice
allows to collaborate with other institutions, to share ideas and materials, but also a part of the
production costs amongst the venues. Moreover, the loan of temporary exhibitions lengthens their
life and allows the widest possible audiences to experience objects that might be dispersed amongst
several collections. A selection of relevant examples shows how the noun tour is used in the corpus
in the context so far outlined:
(27)
The exhibition began its tour at the Kupferstichkabinett in Berlin and was then shown at the
Scuderie Papali al Quirinale in the autumn before its opening at the Royal Academy.
(London, Royal Academy of Art, Botticelli’s Dante, 1 March 2001)
132
(28)
Willem de Kooning: The Late Paintings, The 1980s, which finishes its international tour at
The Museum of Modern Art, New York, provides the first opportunity to study in depth the
artist's last decade of work.
(New York, Museum of Modern Art, Willem de Kooning, 1 November 1996)
Travelling exhibitions are flexible and can be created at a global level: they can be
considered as a positive effect of globalization, which, from the museum’s point of view, has been
a challenge in developing new strategies and policies (Lord and Lord 2002). It is therefore
reasonable to point out that the growth of the noun tour in the EPA Diacorpus reflects this cultural
trend, which involved museums in a more global, international perspective. Furthermore, to confirm
this suggestion is the decrease of the noun country, mostly used in the corpus to address exhibitions
of national interest, featuring local artists or collections, as the following examples (29, 30) explain:
(29)
This selection [...] [is] an opportunity of seeing a remarkable and unusual group from one of
the outstanding private collections in the country.
(London, Victoria & Albert Museum, Bruce Ingram Collection, 1 April 1962)
(30)
Son of the former Consul General of Sweden, Oldenburg started his career in Chicago,
attended the School of the Art Institute from 1953 to 1955, moved to New York in 1956 and
soon gained the reputation of being one of the leading "pop" artists in the country.
(Chicago, Museum of Contemporary Art, Claes Oldenburg, 1 October 1967)
It can be therefore suggested that lexical change related to the nouns tour and country in the
EPA Diacorpus is strictly associated with a relevant development concerning museums from the
eighties onward, the shift towards a more global perspective and the rise of travelling exhibits.
8.4.5 catalogue
Ranking 17th amongst the most increasing items of the corpus, the noun catalogue has a total
of 249 occurrences, equally distributed between American and British section. Its CV score is
72.86, while the profile across decades is 5, 14, 30, 58, 58, 84. Once again we are in front of a
133
genre-specific term and a distinct trend of the EPA Diacorpus, since the occurrences of catalogue
sharply decrease from the 1950s onwards in the Time Magazine corpus.
90
80
70
60
50
40 catalogue
30
20
10
0
1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000
Figure 8.19 – Frequencies of catalogue
As already emerged in the pilot study (see chapter 7), this item is worth of interest within the
analysis of lexical variation: it ranks amongst the keywords of EPAs issued in the 2000s, because
the latter have a high percentage of this noun when compared with those issued in the 1950s.
Typically, a catalogue is said to accompany the exhibition, as if it was an important, inseparable
component of it, and is positively evaluated as fully/beautifully/richly illustrated (47 occurrences),
comprehensive (6), available (6), or even ambitious (1 case only), to mention the most relevant
collocates. The following concordances (31) suggest how the publication can be presented at a
glance:
(31)
before reproduced, this benchmark catalogue sheds new light on the artist.
A comprehensive full colour catalogue will accompany the exhibition.
by a fully-illustrated and documented catalogue. Press Day: Wednesday
and described in an extensive catalogue of 128 pages, with 24
ADMISSION FREE. A highly illustrated catalogue written by the organiser of
is accompanied by a lavishly illustrated catalogue. HOURS OF OPENING
is accompanied by a scholarly catalogue discussing the comparisons
Fine Arts, Boston, said: "This splendid catalogue is a wonder for scholars,
nd Stephen Wildman - this superb catalogue provides a fascinating insight
134
A catalogue represents a useful tool for scholars, reviewers, collectors and art lovers in
general, so the growth of this noun over time can be indeed related to educational aims increasingly
pursued by museums. Nonetheless, it is also an item on sale in bookshops, from which museums
can profit. The increasing profile of the noun catalogue in the EPA Diacorpus could reflect the urge
for finding new forms of financial support, which has been already invoked throughout the analysis
in order to explain the rise of other lexical items: in the first place, tickets, but also events and
education (see sections 8.4.2 and 8.4.3). This suggestion is confirmed by the increasing profile of
other nouns identifying published items related to the exhibition, such as book (8, 20, 20, 6, 53, 76)
and publication (5, 9, 5, 7, 20, 33). Since the mention of the catalogue is a recurrent feature of EPAs
and is expression of a specific communicative purpose, its positioning within the structure of EPAs
will be further examined in the following chapter of the thesis (chapter 9).
8.4.6 release
Among Epa Diacorpus lockwords - i.e. words that remained stable over time - release is the
word showing the most consistent profile. Its 294 overall occurrences are distributed across the six
decades in the following way: 41, 53, 54, 50, 51, 45. They are also quite evenly balanced within the
British (130) and the American (164) components of the corpus. All occurrences are related to the
noun, no instance refers to the verb.
60
50
40
30
release
20
10
0
1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000
Figure 8.20 – Frequencies of release
135
This result is rather obvious, since the word release clearly identifies the textual genre
investigated in the present study: a statement prepared for the press, i.e. a press release. As a
consequence, in more than a third of the occurrences (122 out of 294) release is part of the
expression press release; there are also 21 occurrences of news release and 10 of release alone,
both used in the same way and with the same meaning as press release. The following examples
show how these expressions typically occur in the corpus (32, 33, 34):
(32)
Orazio Gentileschi at the Court of Charles I
3 March-23 May 1999
Supported by The Bernard Sunley Charitable Foundation
THE NATIONAL GALLERY
PRESS RELEASE
The National Gallery, in conjunction with the Museo de Bellas Artes in Bilbao, is organising
the first ever exhibition of the work of the 17th-century Italian painter Orazio Gentileschi
(1563-1639).
(London, The National Gallery, Orazio Gentileschi, 1 January 1999)
(33)
NEWS RELEASE
March 2003
ART DECO 1910-1939
27 MARCH - 20 JULY 2003
Sponsored by Ernst & Young
On 27 March, the Victoria and Albert Museum opens Art Deco 1910-1939, the most
comprehensive exhibition ever staged on one of the most glamorous and popular of all
artistic styles.
(London, Victoria&Albert Museum, Art Deco 1910-1939, 1 March 1959)
(34)
If a story results from this release, a cutting would be appreciated
(London, Victoria&Albert Museum, Humphry Repton, 1 November 1982)
Another important function of release is that identified by the clusters for release, followed
by the date provided by authors for publication, and for immediate release, totalling together 118
occurrences. Often the phrases are capitalized in order to highlight them, as in the following
concordances (35):
136
(35)
FOR RELEASE: Wednesday, April 21, 1954
January 6, 1967 FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE An exhibition of five
10 January 1976 FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE The pagentry and magni
This indication was and still is very important for journalists receiving press releases,
especially in the case of EPAs, announcing the opening day of exhibition. Distributing information
at exactly the right moment is essential: if the press release is sent out too early, a journalist may
lose or forget about it; too late and they will not have enough time to cover the story. Moreover,
different media have different lead times. A glossy consumer monthly works up to six months in
advance of publication, for example, while radio or television may arrange interviews or a
documentary in a shorter time and with tighter deadlines.
The phrase for immediate release indicates that the information in the release is not
embargoed, i.e. it is not to be published until a certain date.
Our conclusion is that release can be considered as a fundamental meta-discourse item, used
not only to identify the textual genre, but also to guide journalists in their work. The fact that
release is a lockword – and more than this, the most stable across decades – tell us much on the
awareness writers had regarding the genre and the purposes of EPAs since the early stages of
museum public relations.
8.4.7 picture, images
Coming to the lexical nouns showing a decreasing pattern over time, the most significant
case is that of picture, ranking second in the top twenty declining words.
137
120
100
80
60
picture
40
20
0
1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000
Figure 8.21 – Frequencies of picture
Its decrease is not easy to explain. Since the 224 total occurrences of picture are evenly
distributed across the British and American sections of the EPA Diacorpus, the trend is relevant for
both components. Moreover, the noun decreased only in its singular form and not in its plural,
which actually increased (12, 14, 15, 35, 29, 69). In our reference corpus, the Time Magazine, the
noun decreases both in the singular and plural. If we take a closer look at the concordances of
picture, we can observe that in most cases (158 over 224 occurrences) the noun is modified by a
definite determiner such as the or this, thus EPA writers mean a very specific picture. See for
instance the following concordances (36) :
(36)
was old but not original. The picture will be on public exhibition
reverie. I am convinced that this picture has a charm all its own
in this country. It is the only picture by him which is certainly
The gradual decrease of this typical pattern related to picture could be explained in terms of
new design criteria. While in the fifties and the sixties the attention was often placed on a single,
specific artwork on display (a picture, namely), nowadays exhibitions are massive events featuring
many items at once. We cannot expect, therefore, a focus on a single, specific item, but rather a
general presentation of the works on display or a list of most prominent items.
This trend is confirmed by the growth of other plural forms identifying artworks on display
within the EPA Diacorpus, such as images (3, 11, 8, 21, 77, 90), objects (5, 23, 10, 14, 30, 43) and
works (67, 88, 119, 140, 177, 292). The increasing frequencies of images, objects and works are not
138
necessarily in contrast with those of the respective singular form, at least not in quantitative terms.
In fact, when used in the singular form, these nouns seem to lose their concrete meaning and
acquire a different sense. Conversely, the noun picture always keeps its concrete meaning in the
EPA Diacorpus, both in its singular and its plural form. If we compare the singular image to its
plural images, for instance, we can see that the noun is quantitatively increasing (0, 18, 4, 9, 10, 39),
but only in a minor part of the cases is the singular noun used in its concrete sense and does it
identify a specific work on display. The image in question is rather a picture formed in the mind of
the artist or a general opinion about a person, as in the following concordances (37):
(37)
the city is celebrated as an image of sparkling modernity whilst
furniture design and enhance the image of the French furniture industry
interesting disparity between the image of the ancient world that we derive
a rapid-fire combination of image processing and ironic, spoken
object does not seem to play a relevant role in terms of variation, with 40 occurrences and a
profile across decades of 7, 15, 4, 1, 9, 4, while work, which increases over time (144, 122, 155,
140, 182, 241), is much more used in a collective sense, in order to address the whole body of work
produced by an artist or to identify a group of objects. See for instance the following concordances
(38):
(38)
retrospective of the artist's work at the Foundation in 1968.
he boldly returned to figurative work in the late 1960s.
widely varied subjects. His work combines visual elegance
He says, "If I look back on my work over a period of years
context of a consistent body of work that critically investigates
We can argue for the trend of increasing plural nouns identifying objects on display as
reflective of the rise of large and multi-item exhibition, which is a real phenomenon occurred in the
last decades and still on-going. This result actually reinforces the goodness of the method we
adopted so far, since data allow us to make statements on cultural change specific to the
environment of museums and exhibitions.
139
8.4.8 man
Among concrete nouns showing decrease over time is also man, which ranks 8th within the
top twenty decreasing words of the corpus with a profile across decades of 50, 34, 24, 13, 13, 21
occurrences. The ratio between American and British occurrences is 104 vs. 49.
Figure 8.22 – Frequencies of man
In one occurrence out of three man is part of the phrase one man show or one man
exhibition, an expression used in order to identify an exhibition focusing on a single artist rather
than a group of several artists, while in one occurrence out of four the noun is part of the title of a
picture or art work. Both functions are shown in the following concordances (39):
(39)
February 1879, one year after his first one-man exhibition of paintings
country and abroad. His first important one-man show was an exhibition of
art form. His monumental series "Man of the 20th Century" is an
perhaps will be the "Portrait of a young Man" by Memling, unique for the
We are going to focus especially on the first function, because for an artist one man
exhibitions are particularly relevant. A monographic or solo exhibition may take the form of a
comprehensive retrospective of an artist’s career or alternatively highlight a particular body of
work, such as work relating to a specific theme or work in a particular medium. Moreover, an
exhibition by a single artist can contain works in a variety of media, or it can take the form of a site-
specific installation of works for a particular venue. Curiously, all the occurrences of the phrase one
140
man show/exhibition date back to the period comprised between 1955 and 1988, while the phrase is
absent from most recent EPAs. The Time Magazine also gives evidence of the decline of the phrase
one man show, which appears across the decades with the following frequencies: 85, 93, 36, 17, 12,
9.
The EPA Diacorpus was explored in terms of alternative phrases with a similar meaning,
such as, for instance, solo exhibition, which has 17 occurrences distributed between 1995 and 2005,
and monographic exhibition, which has only two occurrences, also belonging to the period 1990-
2009. It seems, therefore, that both expressions were not successful enough to replace the
disappearance of one man show/exhibition. Conversely, the noun retrospective, which identifies an
exhibition of works of an extended period of a single artist’s activity, increased over time, shifting
from 7 occurrences in 1950 to 35 in 2000. So, it may be concluded that retrospective has replaced
the phrase one man show/exhibition and is favoured over other lexical items when an exhibition
focused on a single artist is to be mentioned. The success of the noun retrospective in respect of
more complex phrases can be explained with an urge for simplification and, at the same time, with a
need for a more specific lexis, typical of art discourse: one man show, for instance, could sound
misleading for its association with performing arts; moreover, the phrase identifies an idiom with a
negative semantic prosody: someone who gives a one man show is someone who does or manages
just about everything, leaving no space to others.
8.4.9 painters
Ranking 18th within the top list of decreasing words of the corpus, with a profile of 38, 15,
17, 26, 19, 24 occurrences and a CV score of 36.16, painters shows an irregular profile across the
six decades, which implies that special care is needed before generalizing related findings.
Occurrences are equally distributed between American and British EPAs and no significant
difference can be highlighted in the patterns of this noun when sections are analysed separately. A
clear and gradual pattern of decline is shown by painters in the Time Magazine corpus.
141
Figure 8.23 – Frequencies of painters
The reason for the decrease of the word painters could relate to the system of values shared
by art professionals, which shapes EPAs and substantiates many lexical choices made by writers. In
our times to define artists merely as painters could sound limiting or, at least, too technical, as often
contemporary artists can manage different media and several techniques at the same time. This is a
consequence of contemporary art, where the boundaries between the traditional media categories -
painting, sculpture, photography etc.- have become blurred. When talking about their roles, artists
themselves avoid strict definitions. It has to be noted that the noun sculptors also decreases over
time within EPA Diacorpus, falling from 17 to 8 occurrences, while photographers is increasing
(from 6 to 30 occurrences), maybe as a consequence of the emergence of photography as a new
medium. The singular forms painter, photographer and sculptor show different profiles across
decades: painter is stable, photographer is increasing, sculptor is decreasing. Such contrasting data
do not allow us to make general and definite claims in this direction; nonetheless, three out of six
nouns identifying artists on the basis of a specific skill (painter, painters, sculptor, sculptors,
photographer, photographers) show a pattern of decrease within the EPA Diacorpus; this could be
enough to suggest an ongoing lexical change, maybe not completed yet: a trend reflective of how
artists see themselves and want to be seen and presented to the press, not merely as masters of a
technique, but rather as creative and multifaceted talents.
8.4.10 landscape
The noun landscape is the second most frequent lockword of the EPA Diacorpus. It has a
total of 153 occurrences and is characterized by a stable profile across decades (25, 27, 21, 23, 28,
142
29), which also determines a low CV (12.09). The stability of this item seems to be a distinct
feature of the EPA Diacorpus, since the noun shows a different pattern across the decades in the
Time Magazine corpus, characterized by irregular decrease (265, 401, 350, 313, 280, 151).
Figure 8.24 – Frequencies of landscape
Two occurrences of the noun out of three belong to the British section of the corpus, so the
trend related to this word has to be regarded as more significant for that part. Other occurrences
within the same lemma are landscapes, landscaping, landscapist and landscapists. The plural form
of the noun, landscapes, totaling 76 instances, shows an irregular path over decades (7, 15, 7, 16,
10, 21), while landscaping, landscapist, both appearing in the fifties, and landscapists, appearing in
the nineties, are hapax legomena.
Typically, the noun landscape is premodified by an indefinite article and an attributive
adjective carrying evaluative meaning and functional to the description of the picture: it may be, for
instance, quoting examples from the corpus, a romantic, a realistic, a fantastic, a luminous or a pure
landscape. At least half of all the occurrences can be ascribed to this recurrent construction. If we
look at the co-text, it can be also noticed that the word is especially related to the technique of
painting: in about 40 occurrences the noun appears in the immediate surroundings of words like
painting/s, painter/s, picture, depicting, and, in fewer cases, drawing/s and photography.
Moreover, in 31 occurrences landscape is part of the title of a picture or of an exhibition, as shown
in the following concordances (40):
143
(40)
van de Velde's little "Winter Landscape", which may well have influenced
The Poetic Landscape takes a new look at Claude as a
David Friedrich's Moonlit Landscape, or Turner's The Pass at
It turns out that the word landscape is used in consideration of its descriptive force, which
can be enhanced through evaluative adjectives; moreover, this noun evokes a well-known genre in
the field of visual arts, which everyone is familiar with. However, these elements alone do not
explain the persistence and the stability of the noun landscape in the language of EPAs from the
fifties onwards. An intriguing suggestion may be that, although new art techniques were introduced
and new media emerged in the last decades, such as photography, film and video, a landscape
remained a consistent object in art displays, a sort of classic, an evergreen that never grows old. At
this point it could be objected that other subjects can be regarded as fashionless and out of time in
art as well: portraiture, in particular, has always been the great alternative to landscape painting.
The portrait or landscape question is important because it defines the place and role of
people in a picture. In a portrait, one encounters a person and is introduced to a sort of conversation
between the painter and the model. A landscape offers a different experience: figures may be
included, but at a greater distance from the artist and viewer. This offers a more circumspect view
of people.
Consequently, the EPA Diacorpus was explored in search of items related to the lexical field
of portraiture. While the use of the verb portray is rather irrelevant – less than 10 overall
occurrences – the word portrait (211 total occurrences) shows an irregular path over decades (28,
56, 18, 45, 22, 42), while its plural form, portraits (174 total occurrences), gradually increases (12,
14, 15, 35, 29, 69). The noun portraiture identifying the practice of making portraits is increasing as
well (5, 0, 1, 5, 9, 12). This may reflect a fluctuation in the preferences of exhibitions’ visitors and
curators, gradually shifting their attention towards individuals, to be approached from a closer point
of view, in a sort of voyeuristic curiosity that is typical of our times. The clear growth of the plural
form, portraits, opposed to the irregular one shown by the singular, portrait, can also be related to
the proliferation of multi-item exhibition, another phenomenon which has emerged in contemporary
times (see also the case of picture vs. pictures in section 8.4.7)
8.4.11 drawings, paintings
The plural nouns drawings and paintings were reunited in the analysis because they identify
common art objects displayed by exhibitions, often intentionally combined. They rank respectively
144
9th and 13th among the lockwords of the EPA Diacorpus in view of their CV score which is,
respectively, 20.87 and 22.00. Their frequency patterns across the decades are however different
and irregular: drawings has a profile of 86, 85, 59, 60, 97, 67 occurrences (255 American, 199
British), while paintings has a profile of 87, 86, 105, 116, 106, 151 occurrences (363 American, 288
British). It turns out that the frequencies of these items are not always aligned and stable over time;
paintings, in particular, shows a pattern of drastic growth in the last decade. Moreover, the
distribution of both items between American and British section is quite uneven, which introduces a
further element of fuzziness in the analysis of these items. Conversely, the patterns shown by
drawings and paintings in the Time Magazine are both unidirectional and clearly decreasing.
Figure 8.25 – Frequencies of drawings, paintings
A peculiarity of these items is that they often appear together as a binomial – paintings and
drawings (18 occurrences) - or in combination with other nouns: drawings and prints (24), prints
and drawings (11), paintings, drawings, sculpture (10). Corpus evidence in this case reflects how
art works are combined within the exhibition design in order to provide a comprehensive overview
on artists or art movements. Sketches and drawings, for instance, can be used to explain the
preliminary work behind a painting and to show how the artist developed his original idea through a
series of gradual steps. Such an approach adds value to the exhibition’s experience and allows
curators, at the same time, to enrich the exhibit itself with more items on view.
The following extract (41) provides a relevant example of this design strategy:
145
(41)
Andrea Mantegna (c. 1431  1506) was one of the greatest artists of the early Italian
Renaissance. This exhibition, in which paintings, drawings and engravings have
been assembled from throughout the artist's career, traces the development of
Mantegna's innovative genius.
(London, Royal Academy of Arts, Andrea Mantegna, 1 January 1992)
The educational purpose associated in showing together paintings and drawings goes hand
in hand with the urge to provide a significant volume of pieces on display. Drawings, prints and
lithographs are generally easier and less expensive to deliver and therefore to exhibit. In times of
financial difficulties, this may also sound as a valid argument.
Data concerning the nouns drawings and paintings do not allow to make general claims
about a common trend regarding these items: in fact, while a certain degree of stability may be
recognized in the case of drawings, paintings seems to follow a path of its own, which does not
necessarily coincide with that of drawings, which is, actually, one of increase.
Other words related to the lemma PAINT show an irregular profile across decades, as in the
case of painted (23, 46, 7, 22, 20, 47), painting (97, 89, 78, 75, 77, 145), painter (21, 30, 12, 26, 27,
26). A special case is that of painters, which ranks 18th within the top list of decreasing words of the
corpus (38, 15, 17, 26, 19, 24) and which has already been dealt with in section 8.4.9. Conversely,
words belonging to the lemma DRAW have a more consistent profile, as in the case of drawing (16,
19, 12, 11, 25, 28) and draw (2 , 2, 3, 2, 2, 8).
On the one hand, a presumed increase of paintings could be traced back to a trend already
highlighted in the analysis, that of increasing plural nouns identifying objects on display as
reflective of the rise of large and multi-item exhibition. The stable pattern of drawings, on the other,
could be interpreted as evidence for the stability of this technique, which still remains a relevant
feature for exhibitions, despite the rise of new media such as photography and video in the second
half of the 20-century.
8.4.12 curator, director
Curators and directors play a crucial role in the organization of an exhibition and their
textual mention within EPAs can tell us much of how they have been engaged in the process across
the decades.
Data regarding the frequency profiles of these nouns in the EPA Diacorpus are the
following: curator ranks 12th among the most increasing items over time, with a CV score of
146
101.13; its frequency profile across decades is 9, 15, 25, 28, 65, 130. Conversely, director ranks
19th among the most stable items, with a CV score of 22.60; its profile is 40, 48, 51, 39, 25, 47. It
has to be noted that while curator shows a clear pattern of growth across decades, director is
characterised by a slight decreasing trend from the seventies to the nineties, while it keeps a profile
of stability in the other decades. A further striking element is that in the case of these items, as
never before, a great discrepancy has to be noted between American and British frequencies: 216
occurrences of director out of 249 are American, so as 201 occurrences of curator out of 269.
Figure 8.26 – Frequencies of curator, director
It has been already pointed out that, despite the importance of all specialists engaged in a
museum, curators have the key role (Kavanagh 2005): they decide what is held in collections and
shown in exhibitions, and they are also responsible for the success of some artists and the failure of
others. When in charge for an exhibition, they also have to locate, buy or borrow items from
institutions or individual collectors. They may often also work closely with artists to create and
develop work to a specific brief. Generally their role is about collecting and exhibiting art work, but
curators have been increasingly involved into administrative and outreach work, such as fundraising
for exhibitions, providing educational tools, and working to increase the profile of an institution or
exhibition. More importantly for the specific of this thesis, it is in the role of the curator to write
descriptive texts explaining the exhibition concept, which serve as a basis for press officers when
writing EPAs (see chapter 6). This also explains why curators are often quoted within the text: an
147
aspect, that of quotations, which is going to be further examined in the next chapter of the thesis
(section 9.8).
Conversely, the role of a museum director is generally associated with administrative work,
although, of course, there is more than this under that label: actually, a director is in charge of the
whole museum and its working; he represents the institution in contacts with the public and works
with the entire staff assisting in any department; he also oversees finances. Nonetheless, his role has
been seemingly overwhelmed by that of curators over time, to the point that their duties and
functions are sometimes overlapped. It is therefore worth exploring how these museum
professionals have been mentioned in the EPA Diacorpus and whether any lexical variation
regarding these nouns mirrors a cultural change in their function and perception of the public.
While there is no ambiguity with regard to the noun curator, which always identifies the
specialist in charge for the exhibition announced by the EPA, the noun director does not necessarily
identify the museum director: there are indeed many other directors mentioned in the corpus, such
as Public Affairs Directors, Public Information Directors, Publicity Directors, and other
denominations that can be all traced back to the same role, that of head of public relations. There
are also directors of single departments within the museum, such as the director of the Department
of Prints, or Photography. Once that all these incongruous occurrences have been discarded, 88 total
occurrences of (museum) director are left, distributed across the six decades in the following
sequence: 9, 18, 19, 21, 11, 10. It turns out, therefore, that the trend of this noun is not, actually, one
of stability: the frequency gradually increased from the 1950s to reach its highest point in the 1980s,
then began to decrease and went back to the initial value. According to this result, it can be stated
that the mention of curators has outnumbered that of museum directors over time in the EPA
Diacorpus. Moreover, especially in the 1990s and the 2000s it happens that many EPAs can be read
in their entirety, from the start to the end, without finding any reference to the museum director.
This lead to conclude that curators play indeed a leading role in the organization of an exhibition,
but also carry the highest responsibility, as they are particularly exposed to the public. Corpus
evidence also shows how this aspect is quantitatively more relevant for American museums.
148
8.5 Adjectives
The lexical items showing variation over time within this category are visual (increased),
famous (decreased), first, great, and known (stable).
8.5.1 visual
Totalling 107 occurrences (71 American, 36 British) within the EPA Diacorpus, the
adjective visual shows a consistently increasing profile across the decades: 2, 16, 15, 14, 22, 38. It
ranks 20th among the most increasing items of the corpus and its CV score is 66.39.
Figure 8.27 – Frequencies of visual
If we take a look at the concordances, we may find that the most frequent three-word cluster
is the visual arts with 19 occurrences. The first appearance of the cluster dates back to 1961 and
belongs to an American EPA. Starting from 1969, the cluster is frequently used in British EPAs as
well. See for instance the following examples (42, 43):
(42)
During his youth he was not exposed to the visual arts. He attended Yale University for two
years, but left because he had no interest in academic training.
(New York, Museum of Modern Art, Mark Rothko Exhibit, 18 January 1961)
149
(43)
The connection of the Victoria and Albert Museum with the field of photography, at large as
a branch of the visual arts, is not known to a wide public.
(London, Victoria&Albert Museum, Photographs of Henri Cartier Bresson, 1 January 1969)
The phrase ‘visual arts’ was introduced during the first half of the 20th to identify the arts
that are primarily visual in nature, such as drawing, painting, sculpting, printmaking, photography,
design, crafts, video, filmmaking and architecture, as opposed to music, drama, and literature.
Before that, anything that had been created to please the senses – from music to dance, from
literature to art as we know it – was commonly gathered under the definition of ‘fine arts’, which
implied an aesthetic judgment and a subtle differentiation between what could be considered fine
and what could not.
The phrase ‘visual arts’ was already in use in art discourse during the time-period covered
by the EPA Diacorpus. The Time Magazine Corpus, which can be considered as a valid mirror of
the language used by the press from the 1920s onwards, gives evidence of a first occurrence of the
phrase in 1932: visual arts are mentioned within an article on the use of art in advertising. Thus the
very origin of the phrase has to be connected with academic environments: the phrase appeared in
the title of an influential essay published by the American art historian Bernard Berenson,
Aesthetics and History in the Visual Arts (Berenson 1948) and was further consacrated by Erwin
Panofsky, who entitled one of his main works Meaning in the visual arts (Panofsky 1955).
It is to be noted that the language of EPAs slowly absorbed this new coinage coming from
academic settings and has applied it increasingly from the early sixties. Conversely, the phrase fine
arts gradually disappeared from the lexis of EPAs, surviving only in crystallized forms, such as in
the names of museums (for instance, the Boston Museum of Fine Arts), schools, academies,
departments, or university courses. There are only 58 occurrences of fine arts within the corpus,
most of them (40) dating back to the period 1950–1999.
It might be concluded that EPA writers were responsive to the introduction of new coinages
in the field of art discourse, as well as to the decline of other expressions previously in use that may
have sounded misleading or out of style. EPA writers were aware of lexical change in their relevant
field of action, art discourse, and were also able to apply it to their daily professional language. This
result also highlights an urge to discard ambiguous expressions in favor of a more conventional,
neutral and specialized language for EPAs, capable of making EPAs more recognizable as a genre
within the general domain of art discourse.
150
8.5.2 first
Figure 8.28 – Frequencies of first
first has 696 overall occurrences, 255 within the British and 441 within American section.
Although ranking 16th within the list of the most consistent words of the EPA Diacorpus, on the
basis of a rather low CV score (22.40), the adjective first is characterized by an irregular pattern
across decades: 109, 107, 75, 119, 136, 150. As a matter of fact, from the 1970s onward the
frequency of this adjective is actually increasing, which leads to guess it gained importance over
time. The comparison with the Time Magazine Corpus does not help us to classify first among
stable or increasing items, because its pattern in that reference corpus is, unexpectedly, one of
decrease.
The most relevant clusters related to this adjective reflect a communicative strategy of
novelty which is typical of EPAs (Lazzeretti and Bondi 2012). Among these are for the first time
(83 occurrences, to be completed with expressions like on display, on view, etc..), the first
exhibition/retrospective (26), the first major exhibition/retrospective (24), and many other similar
phrases. The notion of novelty fits very well the value system of both art experts obviously sensitive
to innovation and originality and art journalists, also looking for news value. In order to be
successful, namely, an exhibition has to offer something which is on display for the public for the
first time. This explains the success over time of the fore-mentioned phrases, to be found among
American EPAs already in the 1950s, while only from the sixties onwards also among the British
ones.
151
The following example (36) provides the very first occurrence of the phrase for the first time
to be found within the EPA Diacorpus. It is taken from an EPA issued by the New York MoMA.
(44)
Of special interest among the portraits are Marie Laurencin in 1906 by herself, his daughter
Marguerite in 1905 by Matisse, and the composer Ferruccio Busoni in 1916 by Umberto
Boccioni, all shown for the first time by the Museum.
(New York, Museum of Modern Art, New Drawings from Museum Collection, 1 March 1954).
The cluster has been largely used in the following decades and up to now; it can be
considered a typical example of the evaluative phraseology and recurrent lexical patterns
characterizing the genre of EPAs over time. Yet it is striking that these evaluative patterns have
always characterised the genre since its very first origin and are not a result of promotional purposes
emerged in particular from the 1980s onward, as it could have been normally expected.
8.5.3 great, famous, known
With regard to the adjectives great, famous and known, the analysis is carried out in
association with that of the abstract lexical noun career because of the semantic link they share in
terms of evaluation of the artist (see section, 8.3.1).
8.6 Adverbials and pro-forms
Among adverbials and pro-forms, the most interesting items in terms of variation within the
EPA Diacorpus are here, there, so and still. They all show a decreasing profile over time, with the
exception of still, which has an up-and-down frequency profile and is therefore hard to classify. It
seemed however useful to include it in the analysis in view of its peculiar use in the corpus.
8.6.1 here
Let us start with here, which has 104 overall occurrences (52 American, 52 British)
distributed across the six decades in the following sequence: 31, 32, 13, 13, 7, 8. As a graphic
representation of its profile shows (Figure 8.29), the pattern related to the adverbial here is one of
clear decline.
152
35
30
25
20
here
15
10
5
0
1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000
Figure 8.29 – Frequencies of here
Here is mostly used within the EPA Diacorpus in its deictic function, in order to suggest a
closer distance between the writer and the work he is describing. By using here, EPA writers direct
the reader’s gaze, pointing to a specific detail of the art work, as in the following example (45):
(45)
Here, before a landscape, the figures are compressed within a Gothic architectural setting
elaborately sculptured.
(London, National Gallery, New picture by Van der Weyden, 13 March 1957)
In the sentence here transcribed (45) the writer makes use of visual representation and gives
the reader the impression of being in front of the picture; he seems to act as a guide delivering a
presentation in front of visitors; it could be also said that, in evaluating the picture, he adopts an oral
style, as the description turns out particularly vivid. It has been pointed out that deictic reference is
a means for dynamism in descriptions and that it blurs the distinction between the writer and the
reader (Radighieri 2009: 107). Consequently, in consideration of how the dynamism of descriptions
is vital for the genre of EPAs, the decline of here within the EPA Diacorpus comes as a surprise.
The comparison with the Time Magazine Corpus is not useful in this respect, because of the
irregular pattern shown by the adverbial across the six decades: 3,273, 2,856, 3,038, 2,921, 3,638,
2,759.
However, the decreasing trend of here in the EPA Diacorpus could have to do with mere
journalistic reasons: press releases aim at being retold and therefore have to be written in a way that
lessens any further journalistic elaboration, to the point that they could be easily cut and pasted. If
153
we adopt this perspective, which Jacobs calls ‘preformulation’ (Jacobs 1999a), the use of the deictic
here does not make sense in a press release: a journalist writing a review of an exhibition at his desk
would not use here to describe something which is elsewhere and not within his grasp. Of course,
the case would be different for a tv reporter, reporting directly from the place of the exhibition, and
therefore referring to art works by means of markers of position.
8.6.2 there
Despite the difficulty to grammatically classify this item, there was considered as a pro-
form, part of so-called existential there-constructions (Quirk et al. 1985), because a manual
observation of concordances revealed that in two occurrences out of three (160 out of 233) it is used
with this function in the EPA Diacorpus, while in the rest of them it is a locative adverbial. No case
of there as an interjection was found.
there ranks 19th amongst the most decreasing items in the EPA Diacorpus, in view of a CV
score of 38.97. Its profile across the six decades is 50, 51, 53, 24, 30, 27. Quantitatively speaking,
this item is more relevant in the British section of the corpus (156 British vs. 77 American
occurrences).
60
50
40
30
there
20
10
0
1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000
Figure 8.30 – frequency of there
Concordance searches show that there is mainly used in the EPA Diacorpus in the way
Quirk et al. (1985) describe typical there-constructions, i.e. as constructions where “the recipient is
expected to interpret a theme as entirely new and unconnected with anything previously introduced”
(1985: 1402). Such constructions are also described by Quirk et al. as ‘presentative’, because they
154
“bring something on to the discoursal stage deserving our attention” (1985: 1408) and ”imply the
‘newness’ of the item concerned” (1985: 1409), which is therefore generally indefinite. Bondi
(2013) also states that “existential there can be seen at play as an attention-managing device
drawing attention to elements in the space of the storyworld” or “places in the text/discourse”
(2013:142). It can be used “to introduce elements that contribute to building the reader’s
perspective and position”, such as “new actors and processes in the story”, “present and past
interpretations of events”, “qualifications of processes presented elsewhere in the text” ( 2013: 142).
The existential there-construction consists of the pronoun followed by a verb and a typically
indefinite noun phrase (Biber et al. 1999: 943): this pattern can be easily recognized in the EPA
Diacorpus, as illustrated by the following examples (46, 47, 48):
(46)
First of all there are the paintings and drawings produced while Rossetti was an active
member of the Pre-Raphaelite Brotherhood.
(London, Royal Academy of Arts, Dante Gabriel Rossetti, 1 January 1972)
(47)
There is a strange picture by Duerer, 'The Child Jesus among the Doctors’, which was
painted in Venice in 1506 if it was the subject, as the Catalogue suggests, of a letter written
there to Duerer's friend Pirckheimer in Nuremberg.
(London, National Gallery, From van Eyck to Tiepolo, 22 February 1961)
(48)
Like the German expressionists, the Neue Sachlichkeit painters clearly did not set out to
produce pleasant images for bourgeois homes - there are no sunny landscapes or beautiful
florals in this exhibition.
(Chicago, Museum of Contemporary Art, German Realism, 20 October 1980)
Not only art works are the indefinite subjects of there-constructions; this pattern is also
exploited to introduce more practical and concrete information, such as that regarding admission
charge or a press preview:
(49)
There will be a Press View on Tuesday, October 25th, between 11 A.M. and 3 P.M.; and an
Invitation Preview Tuesday, October 25th, between three and six o'clock.
(New York, Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum, Constantin Brancusi, 24 October 1955)
155
(50)
There is no admission charge to view the exhibit or to visit the museum, but advance
parking reservations are advised for guaranteed admission.
(Los Angeles, J. Paul Getty Museum, Decorative Arts, 1 January 1979)
In the majority of occurrences there is anchored in the present (106 instances) or in the
future (40), while only a few occurrences (19) are anchored to the past; further, in some cases (20)
there introduces negative constructs. The most frequent cluster associated to there in the corpus is
there will be/also be (37 overall occurrences), followed by there is a/an (28) and there is no (17).
It is difficult to explain the decrease of there in the context of the EPA Diacorpus, because
existential there-constructions are functional to descriptions and announcements, i.e. typical
features of the genre of EPAs. A comparison with the Time Magazine Corpus would lead to
consider the decline of there-constructions as a general trend of language, because evidence of a
clear decreasing pattern of them over time is shown also in the general reference corpus: there is
went from 4,993 occurrences in the 1950s to 1,815 in the 2000s; there are went from 2,689
occurrences to 2,180 in the same time period; there will be from 409 to 173 occurrences.
Conversely, the Time Magazine Corpus shows and increase of the contracted form there’s (from
688 to 2,509 occurrences), which the EPA Diacorpus gives barely evidence of, with only 2 overall
occurrences, both found in American EPAs and dating back to the 1960s. Given the common
results of the comparison between the Time Magazine Corpus and the EPA Diacorpus with regard
to there-constructions, a further explanation, which takes into account the peculiar context of EPA,
can be however attempted. This is based on the character of indefiniteness which characterizes
descriptions introduced by there-constructions. As previously pointed out, it is well- known that the
noun phrase in a there-construction should be indefinite, which implies that a description introduced
in this way may sound inaccurate or shallow to demanding readers as journalists, who expect to
receive a definite account of what is on display. In order to avoid this impression and provide fully
detailed information, there-constructions could have been gradually discarded from EPAs. This
interpretation would also highlight, once again, that even slight hues of meaning can be determinant
in the case of EPAs and that the genre has been lexically shaped not only by choices made by
museum professionals involved in their writing but also by the needs of their main recipients,
requiring sound data for their reports.
156
8.6.3 so
Let us now pass on to the third adverbial on the list, so. It has a total of 150 occurrences
perfectly halved between the two components of the corpus (75 American, 75 British) and a
frequency profile across the six decades of 40, 36, 21, 16, 15, 22. It ranks 14th among the most
decreasing items with a CV score of 42.03. A decreasing trend of so as and adverbial is also shown
by the Time Magazine Corpus, where occurrences went from 18,902 in the 1950s to 10,738 in the
2000s.
45
40
35
30
25
20 so
15
10
5
0
1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000
Figure 8.31 – Frequencies of so
The exploration of concordances shows that the main function of so within the EPA
Diacorpus is to reinforce adjectives and other adverbials in a context of evaluation of works, artists,
and of the exhibition itself. The purpose of the structure so + adjective/adverbial is also functional
to describe an extreme situation; the style of description is emphasized and becomes more
emotionally charged through its use. The following selection of concordances (51) illustrates these
patterns of usage:
(51)
and partly no doubt because it is so beautifully illustrative of contemporary
British art. They are "so personal, so filled with his own visionary
techniques that were to become so important in his later sculptures. It
that he is now able to use color so lucidly. His capacity to employ
157
Another relevant use of the adverbial in the corpus is that identifying the phrase so-called,
identified in 11 cases and functional to the introduction of new, specialized terms to be further
explained:
(52)
after 1872 and the emergence of his so-called "constructive" brush stroke.
and visually compelling works of the so-called Neue Sachlichkeit or "New
porcelain produced in China during the so-called Transitional Period – between
While in the latter case the adverb so functions to introduce new relevant, information for
the readers, revealing a sort of didactic purpose, more often it intensifies the description and adds
dynamism to the scene. Its decline within the corpus is therefore difficult to explain. The
comparison with the Time Magazine Corpus, showing a similar decreasing trend – the occurrences
of so have halved between 1950 and 2000 - suggests a major trend of written language, which EPAs
reflect. Nonetheless, since other points of the analysis of the EPA Diacorpus highlighted the
increasing preference for a neutral lexis and a plain style (see the case of exhibited in section 8.2.2
and that of held in 8.2.4), the decline of so as an emphatic adverbial modifier could be interpreted as
a consequence of avoiding hyperbolic expressions and possibly opting for a less informal style.
8.6.4 still
To conclude the overview of adverbials, still is left to be analysed; as shown by the graphic
representation of its not unidirectional pattern over time (Figure 8.32), still is also the most
controversial within this group of items.
158
35
30
25
20
still
15
10
5
0
1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000
Figure 8.32 – Frequencies of still
It has 118 overall occurrences (57 American, 61 British), with a frequency profile across
decades of 31, 11, 19, 17, 10, 30. The pattern shows a drastic decrease from the 1950s to the 1960s,
followed by a slight increase in the 1970s and the 1980s, while in the 2000s still makes up ground
and reaches the frequency it had in the 1950s. With such an up-and-down profile, findings cannot
be generalized, thus there is an interest in exploring the reasons of the wavering use of this
adverbial in EPAs over time. Although in 36 cases still is used as an adjective (especially within the
phrase still life, identifying a recurrent subject in the visual arts), two occurrences out of three
identify an adverbial form. This explains why the word was classified into this category, despite its
ambiguity. It has also to be noted that the Time Magazine Corpus shows a sharp decrease of still as
an adverbial: from 12,725 occurrences in the 1950s to 4,871 in the 2000s.
Concordances highlight a very peculiar use of the adverbial still within the EPA Diacorpus,
reinforcing the idea of something – an art work - or someone – an artist - that would deserve more
attention and acknowledgment, but still remains hidden, or incomplete, or unknown. There are at
least 14 cases of still used with this nuance, as those provided by the following examples (53, 54):
(53)
The surrealism of Magritte and Delvaux is by now familiar to most people in this country
but the work of these nine artists, all of Flemish rather than French speaking origin, and all
painting within the Symbolist and Expressionist tradition, is still largely unknown.
(London, Royal Academy of Arts, From Ensor to Permeke, 1 September 1971)
159
(54)
In addition, other contemporary Danish artists developed a truly individual identity although
their names are still surprisingly little-known outside their own country.
(London, National Gallery, Danish Painting, 25 April 1984)
In both examples the writer seems to justify the selection of artists featured by the
exhibitions and anticipate potential objections from visitors, who may have never heard their
names. On the one hand, by doing so, the writer defends the curator’s choice and makes clear that
the quality of these artists is not under discussion, although they still deserve greater recognition; on
the other, he implies that the exhibition has something to unveil, arousing a sense of mystery which
can be useful in order to catch the attention of reviewers (Lazzeretti/Bondi 2012).
The irregular frequency profile of still across decades could suggest that these strategies –
along with their related lexical choices - have not been consistently carried out by EPA writers. As a
matter of fact, presenting unknown artists is a risk that museums would preferably avoid. The
analysis of other lexical items shows that different and more concrete assets have been increasingly
exploited in order to reassure audiences about the quality of an artist and, consequently, of the entire
exhibition (see section 8.3.1).
8.7 Prepositions
With regard to prepositions, corpus evidence shows a rather consistent profile of until and
among, while since is characterised by an irregularly decreasing pattern. All of them are evenly
distributed in both sections of the corpus – American and British - and can be considered as
technical prepositions in the context of EPAs and art discourse in general, as they perform some
typical communicative functions within the text that the analysis of concordances will show in the
following sections.
160
8.7.1 until, among
Figure 8.33 – Frequencies of until and among
The preposition until ranks third within the most stable words within the EPA Diacorpus,
with a CV score of 16.82. Its profile is of 34, 36, 29, 30, 22, 35 occurrences across the six decades.
The stability of this preposition within the EPA Diacorpus is in contrast with the result
highlighted by the Time Magazine Corpus, where the preposition actually decreased, dropping from
1,172 occurrences in the 1950s to 544 in the 2000s. Yet the consistency of still in the context of
EPAs may be explained in consideration of its indispensable role in conveying information about
the length of an exhibition, which is open until a certain date and a certain hour. The following
examples (55, 56) show this typical use of the preposition until within the EPA Diacorpus:
(55)
An exhibition of drawings by Italian artists of the sixteenth century and later will open at the
Victoria and Albert Museum on Monday, June 22nd, and will remain open until the end of
September.
(London, Victoria&Albert Museum, Drawings by Italian artists 1500-1800, 1 June 1959)
(56)
Although the museum's regular winter hours are Tuesday through Saturday, 10: 00 to 5: 00,
from November 15, 1980 to February 15, 1981 the hours are extended to include Tuesday
evening until 10:00 and Sunday until 5: 00.
(Los Angeles, J. Paul Getty Museum, Archaeological Photography, 24 October 1980)
161
About 80 occurrences out of 169 of the preposition until within the EPA Diacorpus relate to
this function, which is, namely, to signal the end of the exhibition period or the closing hour.
However, until has another important function within the language of EPAs, shown for instance by
the recurrent cluster until his/her death (16 occurrences), which is to accompany the description of
biographical events related to the artists featured by the exhibition, often presented in a
chronological order, as in the following example (57):
(57)
Rouault was a highly prolific artist who continued to work in a variety of media until his
death in 1958.
(London, Royal Academy of Arts, Georges Rouault, 1 March 1993)
The importance of stressing exhibition closing time and dates – elements that cannot be
avoided in EPAs -, as well as that of providing biographical information on the artist, can explain
the consistency in the frequency of the preposition until across decades.
As for the other lockword preposition, among, it ranks 14th within the top twenty of the most
stable words within the EPA Diacorpus, with a CV score of 22.35. Its profile is of 40, 33, 32, 30,
31, 51 occurrences across the six decades. Also in this case the trend is in contrast with that
provided by the Time Magazine Corpus, showing a sharp decrease of the prepositions over time, so
that the consistency of among can be interpreted as a distinct feature of the EPA Diacorpus.
If we take a look at the concordance, the most relevant clusters are among the most (11
occurrences), among the works (7 occurrences, to be added to at least 20 more cases of the cluster’s
variants among the drawings/images/pictures/photographs/portraits), among the artists (6
occurrences, to be more than doubled with several variants here too, such as among the many
artists/sculptors/the most distinguished contributors, etc.). The general idea carried out by these
clusters is that of a selection among the series of works to be displayed, some of which worth of
particular interest and therefore object of further mention within the text. In a certain sense, the
writer seeks to highlight a point of excellence within the exhibition, by mentioning the works (or
the artists) that in his opinion could be considered as a plus. An illustration of this strategy is
offered by the following example (58), where the noun highlights reinforces the idea of an added
value among the works on view, presented as something that cannot be missed:
162
(58)
Works by Chagall, Robert Delaunay, Kandinsky, Klee, Marc, Modigliani, Mondrian and
Picasso will be included. Among the highlights of the presentation will be Leger's The Great
Parade of 1954, which is considered the definitive work of the artist's career.
(New York, Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum, Jenny Holzer Exhibition, 13 February 1990)
In observing the consistency of these constructions within the language of EPAs over time,
it can be concluded that this way of presenting works and artists on display, placing special
emphasis on one in particular or on a certain selection of items, has always been and still is a
common strategy for EPA writers. The strengths of an exhibition are generally identified before
writing the EPA, on the basis of curatorial hints, and have to be adequately stressed and developed
in the text. Generally, it is in the role of a curator to explain to the staff his concept of the
exhibition, sometimes even providing a text of his own, that can be considered as a first draft of the
press release. In view of this particular writing procedure, it has been already stated that EPAs
reflect a multiple authorship (see chapter 6).
8.7.2 since
Although it ranks among decreasing items, the frequency profile of since is rather irregular.
Its occurrences across the six decades are 47, 29, 26, 24, 17, 46; the CV score is 38.97. As shown
by the graph (Figure 8.34), this form is characterised by a gradual and constant decrease from 1950
to 1990, followed by a drastic and quick growth between 1990 and 2000, to the point that in the
2000s the number of occurrences has reached the same value of the 1950s.
50
45
40
35
30
25
since
20
15
10
5
0
1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000
Figure 8.34 – Frequency of since
163
Since can identify whether an adverbial, a preposition or a conjunction; its more relevant use
in the EPA Diacorpus is that of a preposition, to be recognized in more than an half of the overall
occurrences.
In almost 80 occurrences since is a means for spatiotemporal reference: it is used as a
locator in time and space to introduce a date, a specific time in the past, or an historical event, as in
the following concordances (59):
(59)
Giorgione's lifetime, there are records since 1612 of at least one picture of
been acquired by the National Gallery since 1945, because the opportunities
which have been held at the Museum since 1956, are selective surveys of
work has only begun to be appreciated since her death in 1939, is represented
has been exhibited regularly in Paris since that time. Jean Dubuffet, whom
religious works of a power unparalleled since the High Renaissance.
America, Europe and even the Orient since World War II.The exhibition will
A very frequent cluster, with 15 overall occurrences within the corpus, is since then, which
is also used to introduce a very specific or crucial reference in time or space within the explanation
of a topic, typically when artist biographies are provided or a detailed account of past events
relevant for the exhibition is reported. In the following extract (60) the preposition is used twice in a
row in order to mark with special emphasis a turning point in the career of an artist:
(60)
Kurt Schwitters has been increasingly acknowledged as one of the most original artists of
the twentieth century, particularly since the fifties when interest in Dada was revived. Since
then his art had been regarded as internationally influential, receiving the critical attention
that it deserves.
(New York, Museum of Modern Art, Kurt Schwitters, 1 June 1985)
Given the importance of indicators of time in the content of an EPA, as they provide readers
with further details and enrich the description, especially in the context of an artist biography,
presentation of an artistic movement or historical background, it is difficult to explain the decrease
of the preposition since in the EPA Diacorpus from 1950 to 1990. No particular difference is
highlighted by comparing the frequency profiles of since between the American and British sections
of the corpus, so that a possible related trend cannot be attributed to one and not to another.
Nonetheless, the Time Magazine Corpus also shows a significant decrease of this preposition across
164
decades, from 4,049 in the 1950s to 1,476 occurrences in the 2000s. Findings regarding the EPA
Diacorpus do not fully align with this result, as if the language of EPAs followed its own path,
which does not necessarily coincide with general trends.
8.8 Determiners
Within this category is the determiner some. Ranking 18th among the most stable words of
the corpus, some has a total of 317 occurrences and its profile across decades is: 52, 71, 50, 34, 56,
54. Its variance score is 22.47. It has to be noted that the presence of this item is quantitatively more
relevant in the British section of the corpus (205 British vs. 112 American occurrences).
Furthermore, the trend is in contrast with the Time Magazine Corpus, where some is characterized
by a sharp decrease across the decades, from more than 24,000 occurrences in the 1950s to less than
10,000 in the 2000s.
Figure 8.35 – Frequencies of some
The most significant cluster related to some in the EPA Diacorpus is some of the, with a total
of 78 occurrences. As concordances show (61), it is used in order to highlight a selection of works
or artists, chosen among others in consideration of their relevance.
(61)
they were five centuries ago. Some of the books are presented unbound
at the Louvre in 1960 featuring some of the drawings he had
165
be entertaining but will bring to light some of the fashionable antiques
techniques, styles and iconography. Some of the Italian artists represented
The cluster is also very frequent in combination with superlatives; at least 50 occurrences
can be ascribed to this typical pattern, illustrated by the following concordances (62):
(62)
brings together for the first time some of the best Fabergé pieces from
exquisite still-lifes of fruit and flowers; some of the earliest pure landscape
Thorvaldsen, who created in Rome some of the finest sculptures to be
Native Americans, and others. Some of the most visually arresting images
The idea of a choice in terms of quality is a recurrent feature of the EPA Diacorpus. Other
lexical items showing a consistent frequency over time are functional to the same purpose: see for
instance the adverbial among (section 8.7.1) and the verb selected (section 8.2.4). EPA writers
present the works and the artist on display as the result of a selection, which is seen as a guarantee
for the quality of the exhibition, but also as the final act of a scientific choice, defined by curators,
on the basis of a particular theme or point of interest. These are the inner premises of an exhibition
– to choose an artist instead of another, to select certain works instead of others –, and the
coherence of this choice has to be advocated also through language. This communicative purpose is
consistent over time, since exhibitions have always been based on a selection, although
questionable.
The determiner some may also be interpreted as an indicator of vagueness or lack of
precision (Channell 1994). As Duguid (2010) pointed out, vagueness is a strong indication of
assumed shared knowledge, the referents of vague expressions being assumed to be known by the
reader (Carter and McCarthy 2004: 202) and can be used to soften expressions appearing too direct
or unduly authoritative and assertive. In the specific case of EPAs, the use of some can be explained
as a way for leaving the number of works on display undetermined and not quantifying them
exactly. As a matter of fact, one of the most frequent complaints about art exhibitions derives from
the disappointment caused by an exiguous number of works, often concealed by a very aggressive
communication campaign, which sets high expectations on audiences. In order to prevent criticism
of this kind, EPAs may intentionally avoid details and leave some information vague.
166
8.9 Question words
The relative pronoun which is a lockword of the EPA Diacorpus, ranking 4th within the list
of the most stable words on the basis of its variance score, 17.85. The profile of this item across
decades is 224, 230, 166, 162, 170, 236, for a total of 1,188 occurrences. The presence of this item
is slightly more relevant for the American section of the corpus, with almost a hundred occurrences
more, while no significant difference is to be noted with regard to the profile across decades, which
is one of stability in both components.
Figure 8.36 – Frequencies of which
The stability trend shown by the pronoun which in EPA Diacorpus is in contrast with the
data of the Time Magazine Corpus, showing conversely a dramatic decline of the pronoun, which
went from more than 30 thousand occurrences in the fifties to 12 thousand in the twenties. In his
own research on lexical variation of written language across four general corpora Baker (2011) also
noticed a decline of the pronoun.
The consistency of which within a corpus specialized in art discourse as the EPA Diacorpus
may be explained by taking a closer look to concordances and observing the usage of this pronoun,
which plays a key-role in one of the typical constructions used to present and describe an art work,
or the exhibition itself. The analysis of concordances reveals a recurrent pattern related to which:
typically, a noun, which identifies the object to be described (an art work), is followed by a relative
clause introduced by the pronoun which, then by a verb and a predicate. See the following
concordances (63):
167
(63)
works on view, many of which are among the Museum's most important paintings
works, a large number of which have never previously been shown outside
taste. This painting, which is generally considered the artist's late masterpiece
of the small sculptures which Rodin called his "snakes." These pictures
is organising the display which will occupy nine Rooms. A fully
1987. The exhibition, which will include approximately 150 paintings,
This construction is functional to a specification of what the writer wishes to explain,
evaluate or describe more in detail. As such, it can be recognized, in all its possible variants, in the
majority of the concordances. Since description and evaluation are a permanent feature of EPAs, the
consistency of this pronoun – and of its related construction - over time is self-explanatory. With
regard to this point, innovation seems not to be pursued by EPA writers, who yet elsewhere show a
preference for a more direct, straightforward, unmediated style of descriptions, as the analysis of
further lexical items has shown (see section 8.2.3).
8.10 Acronyms
The increasing presence within the EPA Diacorpus of abbreviations such as tel for telephone
and org for organization, acronyms as uk for United Kingdom and www for World Wide Web, are
lexical signals of the advent of new technologies and especially of the Internet, which have become
fundamental tools of communication for museums. All these acronyms rank among the top ten
increasing items of the corpus: uk is 1st, www is 2nd, org is 3rd, while tel is 8th. With the exception of
uk, which occurs only among British EPAs, all these acronyms are evenly distributed between the
American and British sections of the corpus, with similar frequency profiles across decades.
168
Figure 8.37 – Frequencies of www, org, uk, and tel
First patented in 1876 by Alexander Graham Bell and further developed by many others, the
telephone was the first device in history that enabled people to talk directly with each other across
large distances. Thus, only after World-War II telephones became common to businesses,
government, households, and museums too, due to the expansion of networks and the spreading of
more efficient telephone sets.
The importance of telephone calls in museum public relations is well-known: following up a
press release with a call gives an opportunity to talk about the exhibition in more detail and gently
persuade a journalist to cover it. Journalists themselves may also be interested in contacting the
museum press office in order to receive more information. Typically, museum telephone numbers
are provided in the heading information of EPAs or at the end of the sheet, along with other basic
information regarding the exhibiting venue, in consideration of the importance of providing a
telephone number for press inquiries.
The EPA Diacorpus has a total of 116 occurrences of the word telephone starting from the
fifties, while its abbreviation tel has 151 occurrences and is used only from 1968 onwards.
However, while the profile of telephone is rather irregular across decades (14, 23, 8, 15, 35, 21), tel
shows a profile which is decisively increasing (0, 6, 11, 12, 52, 70). The success of the abbreviated
form in respect of the noun in its entirety can be explained within the general phenomenon of
simplification and contraction of language, as already observed in modern English diachrony
(Hundt/Mair 1999, Duguid 2010).
Moving its first steps between the seventies and the eighties, Internet has imposed itself in
the nineties, changing the way information is gathered and assessed. Museums slowly ventured into
169
online development and launched their websites in the mid- to late-nineties (Rizzo/Mignosa 2013).
Originally, the websites simply duplicated museum brochures, providing information about
exhibitions, events, opening times, etc. Development was constrained by cost, poor visual quality
and lack of technical sophistication (see Paolini et al. 2000). The transition from mass presentation
of information to individually-tailored experiences has been indeed a gradual one. After the turn of
the millennium the use of new web technologies has grown rapidly, giving rise to the terms
‘museum without walls’, ‘post-museum’ and ‘virtual museum’ (Hooper - Greenhill, 2000: 152-
153).
The EPA Diacorpus reflects this dramatic change through the sudden appearance at the end
of the nineties of acronyms used for identifying web pages: www – acronym for World Wide Web -,
org – a domain extension used for non-profit organization, and therefore museums, uk, a national
domain extension. Their profile across decades is respectively 0, 0, 0, 0, 6, 133 for www, 0, 0, 0, 0,
8, 134 for org, and 0, 0, 0, 2, 9, 131 for uk. Further, it has to be noted that these acronyms are a
distinct feature of EPAs – and, more broadly speaking, of press releases – since they are hardly
present in the Time Magazine Corpus (2 occurrences of www in the 2000s), or even absent.
8.11 Terms of address
Within this category fall two decreasing lexical items, mrs and mr.
mrs ranks first among the most decreasing words of the EPA Diacorpus, in view of a CV score
of 110.81, and has a profile of 74, 17, 10, 11, 6, 20 occurrences across the six decades.
mr is the third most decreasing item in the corpus; its CV score is 103.84, its occurrences across
decades are 147, 63, 30, 13, 23, 19.
In quantitative terms, the presence of these items is more relevant in the American section of the
corpus, so it has to be guessed that a possible related trend concerns in particular American EPAs.
170
160
140
120
100
80 mrs
mr
60
40
20
0
1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000
Figure 8.38 – Frequencies of mrs and mr
mrs and mr are used within the EPA Diacorpus to address in a polite and reverential way
loaners, donors and other influential figures who played an important role in the organization. Their
mention in the text is used as a form of acknowledgement of their contribution to the exhibition, as
the following example shows (64):
(64)
Other paintings in the ground floor show include four promised gifts: Mondrian's Trafalgar
Square, and Picasso's Two Acrobats with a Dog, lent by the Honorable and Mrs. William A.
M. Burden; Jackson Pollock, Number 12, 1952, lent by the Honorable Nelson A.
Rockefeller and Renoir's judgment of Paris, lent by Mrs. Louis R. Smith.
(New York, Museum of Modern Art, Monet Mural, 1 June 1959)
The decline in term of address, mrs and mr, is a general trend of English written language; it
could reflect phenomena of democratization and informalization of public discourse, as already
described by Fairclough (1992, 1995). As pointed out by Baker (2010), gendered titles are of
particular interest to researchers of language and gender in English-speaking countries because of
“the inbuilt inequality in the labelling system” (142). As a matter of fact, males do not have to
reveal their marital status with mr, while females are forced to, by choosing between mrs or miss.
In addition to mrs and mr, the EPA Diacorpus provides only 27 occurrences of miss, all dating
to the first three decades (1950, 1960, 1970) and absent in the following decades. The relatively
new term ms is even more unpopular, with 9 overall occurrences. Baker (2010) reported similar
171
evidence of decrease of mr and mrs in his study across the BLOB, LOB, FLOB and BE06 corpora,
which are general corpora from 1931, 1961, 1991, and 2006. Evidence for the decrease of these
items also in American written language can be adduced by the American Time Magazine corpus,
where mrs went from 191 occurrences in the 1950s to 2 occurrences in the 2000s, and mr went from
51 to 15 occurrences in the same time lapse.
The decrease of gendered titles within the EPA Diacorpus may reflect that EPA writers have
been gradually moving away from marking gender when using terms of address, with a particularly
large decrease in mr. This trend also shows that EPAs went gradually towards a more informal
style, absorbing major written language tendencies in parallel to their development as a textual
genre.
8.12 Interjections
The analysis of the increasing interjection please has been previously presented when
dealing with the verb form contact (section 8.2.1).
172
8.13 Discussion and concluding remarks
The main aim of this part of the analysis was to provide an overview of lexical change
occurred in the language of EPAs from the 1950s onwards, applying a method that could possibly
bring about further results in respect to those already emerged from the pilot study, when wordlists
of EPAs issued in the 1950s and in the 2000s were compared and a subsequent list of keywords was
produced.
Baker’s (2011) method, based on the identification of increasing, decreasing , or stable items
over time, and on concordance search and collocational analysis of these items in order to elicit
information on their patterns of usage, has proved valuable in this sense, as it has allowed to report -
or in some more controversial cases only to hypothesise - a number of lexical trends reflective of
changes in terms of style, communicative purpose, and typical features of the genre. At a broader
level, the analysis of lexical variation in EPAs revealed cultural changes related to the specific field
of museum settings and art discourse: for instance, in the way exhibitions are designed and subjects
are selected. Lexical change also mirrors changes in the system of values shared by artists, museum
professionals and art journalists: it suggests, for instance, how the role of artists, curators and
museum directors – and the audience perception of these roles as well - have changed over time.
Changes at the macro-level, such as the phenomenon of globalization, financial crises, and the
advent of new technologies also left their indelible traces in the language of EPAs.
Given the irregularity in the frequency patterns of many analysed items, special care was
needed before making definite claims regarding them and interpretations have always been
presented with great caution; despite this limit, the inner merit of Baker’s method is however to
suggest that all identified items, be they regular or irregular, are reflective of a variation over time
and therefore deserve attention.
Findings on the EPA Diacorpus can be structured around several themes relevant for the
genre of EPAs, both at the textual, surface level, and at the content level: (a) style; (b)
communicative purpose; (c) typical features; (d) criteria for exhibiting art works; (e) criteria
for selecting artists; (f) role of museum professionals; (g) impact of macro-level events.
With regard to (a) style, the decrease of terms of address marking gender, such as mr and
mrs, and the increase of some abbreviations, such as tel for telephone, seem too little to argue for
the informalization of EPAs, which, on the contrary, keep a formal style. Contractions are hard to
be found in the corpus, while the decrease of the intensifier so could signal the intention of avoiding
emphasis and possibly opting for a less informal language. An accentuated presence of the
173
interjection please, typically related to the soliciting phrase please contact, among British EPAs
suggests that the latter are more characterized in terms of politeness. Moreover, data on lexical
variety (see chapter 7) reinforce the idea that EPAs vocabulary is a rich and cultivated one, as
typical of written, formal style. It can be stressed, instead, an increasing urge for a neutral,
conventional lexis, quite a sort of technical jargon, which aims at labelling and so making
recognizable the genre to its users. Words carrying an ambiguous semantic prosody were gradually
discarded: for instance, the phrase one-man show had not the same success over time of the noun
retrospective, although they both address the same exhibition typology. A need for disambiguation
could also be invoked in order to explain the controversial pattern of exhibited, a verb which has
lost its specificity related to art exhibitions over time, to gain different, subtle hues of meaning that
are not completely positive. Corpus evidence also shows that the language of EPAs has become
more accurate over time, as proved by an increasing awareness of new coinages in the field of art
discourse, such as the phrase visual arts, gradually borrowed from academic settings, in parallel to
the dismissal of fine arts.
As for (b) communicative purpose, EPAs appear as a genre shaped not only by their
multiple writers – to be identified with several professionals engaged in museum at different levels,
to begin with curators – but also by the needs of their main recipients, i.e. art journalists. The
decline of the deictic adverb here over time can be read as a trace of pre-formulation (Jacobs
1999a); moreover, the strong consistency of the noun release, a fundamental meta-discourse item,
used not only to identify the genre, but also to guide journalists in their work, for instance when it is
used in the form for immediate release, tells us much about the awareness writers had regarding the
genre and the purposes of EPAs since the early stages of museum public relations: namely, EPAs
were meant to be released and published on a certain date, to be negotiated in respect to the opening
of the exhibition. Corpus evidence also suggests that American museums placed great value on
public relations, to be seen as a part of a complex system of communication which involved the
museum at various levels: data show that an entire department –a lockword particularly relevant for
American EPAs - was entitled to public relations already from the 1950s, while British museums
appear more focused on press office activities, which is only a part of the work associated to PR,
being the latter an increasing phrase among British documents. However, the increasing frequency
of the soliciting phrase please contact in both sections of the corpus suggests that the relationship to
the press has become more overt and explicit over time and that this development involved both
American and British museums.
174
With regard to (c), i.e. the typical features of the genre, a striking element emerged from
the analysis of lexical variation is that evaluative language has always characterized EPAs since
their first origin and it is not to be associated with contemporary practices. The stability of
adjectives such as great, known , first - and of the related phrase for the first time, used to stress the
aspect of novelty of the exhibition – implies that the genre of EPAs was born with these features. Of
course, writers have become more conscious of the potential conveyed by the language of
evaluation over time and have fully exploited it especially in the last two decades, while evaluative
patterns used by 1950's writers seem to be more predictable and repetitive. This result highlights the
importance of adopting a diachronic perspective, since it could not have been achieved limiting the
analysis to contemporary EPAs, as in previous studies (Lazzeretti/Bondi 2012).
Along with evaluation, another consistent feature of EPAs is that of description. Among the
items – and related constructions - pointing to the stability of this feature over time are two
lockwords in particular: the determiner which, functional to a specification of what the writer
wishes to explain, evaluate or describe more in detail, and the auxiliary verb form are, used when a
description of what can be seen at the exhibition at the current moment is provided. Typically, the
time of descriptions is a present tense, but EPAs also embrace a perspective focused on the past,
which is that concerning narrative sections, and one on the future, as required by the announcement
of the exhibition opening. It can be therefore pointed out that EPAs are characterised by a multi-
temporal dimension, masterly managed by writers.
A further trend, that would however require wider data to be fully confirmed, is the
preference for more vivid and straightforward descriptions over time: the decline of the mediating
verbs shown and shows, to be accounted as a general trend of language as proved by the comparison
with the Time Magazine corpus, could be interpreted in these terms.
Coming to (d) criteria for exhibiting art works, lexical change reflected innovations in the
way subjects and pieces to be put on display are chosen by museum professionals. The choice of a
certain subject or artist to exhibit depends on specific values, as well as technical and even
economical reasons. Besides that, the taste of exhibitions public changes fast and museums have to
deal with that. Our analysis revealed that from 1950 onwards some things took a new direction,
while others remained the same. For instance, new media have emerged over time: corpus evidence
shows the rise of photography and the wavering presence of architecture in exhibitions; however,
the art of painting and drawing have not gone out of style, as words belonging to both lemmas,
PAINT and DRAW, show a stable pattern across decades. Moreover, the increasing frequency of
175
the noun media in a context highlighting a rich and various selection of items on display suggests a
further cultural trend for museums, which is to ensure a variety of media, historical periods, objects
and subjects.
Art subjects may change, and portraits – an increasing item within the EPA Diacorpus –
may be more intriguing for our times, but a landscape still appears as a must for any exhibition, to
mention a lockword of the corpus. More caution is required in generalizing findings related to
drawings and paintings, showing not uni-directional patterns over time; yet corpus evidence shows
that they are combined in order to enrich the educational experience of visitors, as well as increase
the number of art works on display with a close eye on costs. At this point, it can be useful to recall
Irvine’s (2004–2009) definition of art discourse as something “defining the cultural category of art
and maintaining the art/non-art binary”: the diachronic analysis of EPAs confirms indeed that
statement, showing how EPA writers are involved in the process of shaping the concept of art and
the ever-changing values related to exhibitions through their lexical selection.
A significant phenomenon reflected by lexical variation of EPAs is also the shift from one-
item to multi-item exhibitions: the decline of the word picture in its singular form, typically pre-
modified by a determiner (the, this), and not in its plural, in parallel to the increase of many other
plural nouns identifying art works to put on display (images, works, objects) leads us to that
conclusion.
Selectiveness appears as a controversial feature in terms of design criteria: while in some
cases the idea of a selection among a plurality of available items is marked by EPAs as a value and
is associated with a positive feature of the exhibition, as the consequence of an authoritative
curatorial choice, in other it may sound as a consequence of a real lack of exhibiting contents.
Lexical choices, therefore, oscillate between these two contradictory positions: on the one hand, it
has to be noted the stability of items and phrases marking the idea of a selection such as among,
selected and some (of the most); on the other, corpus evidence shows the decrease of there-
constructions leading to indefinite objects, indefinite plural noun examples and verb form
represented, typically said of artists with a few works on display. If the stance towards selectiveness
is ambivalent, there is no doubt on the increasing profile over time of items conveying the idea of
comprehensiveness: for instance adjectives like comprehensive, exhaustive, major, typically
modifying the noun exhibition.
176
Lexical variation also mirrors that something has changed with regard to the (e) criteria
for selecting artists: they do not have to be famous – a declining word –, nor particularly great or
known, since these adjectives are preferably used to refer to their work, but they definitely must
have an acknowledged career, being the latter a strong lockword of the corpus. Indeed, young
artists have fewer advantages in the art scene, as reflected by the lexical choice of EPAs, where less
than 30 occurrences can be ascribed to the semantic field of youth. Pointing to this interpretation is
also the controversial and wavering profile across decades of the adverb still, often combined with
adjectives such as unknown or hidden, and addressing artists who still deserve proper recognition: a
consequent impression is that presenting unknown artists is a risk that museums would preferably
avoid, while career artists are perceived as a guarantee of success. Moreover, evaluation in terms of
fame is preferably addressed to art works rather that to artists, for its ambiguous connotation,
especially after Andy Warhol’s 1968 statement ("In the future, everyone will be world-famous for
15 minutes”), leading to the idea that everybody could share a moment of popularity not linked to
any particular merit (Buchloh 2001).
Eventually, EPA writers seem responsive to the way artists prefer to be presented to the
public, not merely as painters or sculptors, for instance, to mention two decreasing items, but rather
in a more complex light, as is implied by the definition of artist and artists, both increasing.
The analysis also highlighted a change in (f) the role of museum professionals, and in
particular with regard to curators and (museum) directors. While the first item shows a pattern of
clear increase over time, the second is characterised by a declining profile, which suggests that their
roles have really intertwined over time, to the point that curators are the most visible professional
figure engaged in the organisation of the exhibition, but also those mostly exposed to the media and
public judgement. Moreover, data show how this trend is peculiar of American environments.
The last issue to be dealt with concerns the (g) impact of macro-level events on the
language of EPAs over time. Corpus evidence confirms the emergence of economic concerns from
the 1980s onward, as reflected by the increase of some revealing lexical items, pointing to the need
to find alternative financial resources in view of cuts in public funding. The increasing frequency
profile of words like admission, tickets and students, for instance, is reflective of the introduction of
visitor fees, which became a necessity for many institutions, but also of the need to differentiate
them for some segments of audiences, i.e students, according to their age and other characteristics.
Similarly, the rise of education programmes and collateral events thematically linked to the
177
exhibition, such as lectures, films, artist talks, guided tours, has to be put in relation to the
increasing importance gained by educational purposes pursued by museums and exhibitions but also
to marketing strategies aiming at widening the number of potential visitors. A catalogue represents
a useful tool for scholars, reviewers, collectors and art lovers in general, so the growth of this noun
over time can be indeed related to educational aims increasingly pursued by museums. Nonetheless,
it is also an item on sale in bookshops, from which museums can profit. To confirm the financial
difficulties faced by museums is also the decline of the verb acquire, possibly related to a strict
reduction of museum budgets devoted to new acquisitions of artworks. Eventually, it has to be
noted that a peak in the occurrences of the phrase made possible by, typically introducing the
mention of exhibition sponsors, is registered in the 1980s.
Last decades of the twentieth century were not only associated with financial hardship for
museums: the EPA Diacorpus reflects the advent of new web technologies through the sudden
appearance at the end of the nineties of acronyms used for identifying web pages: www – acronym
for World Wide Web -, org – a domain extension used for non-profit organization, and therefore
museums, uk, a national domain extension. Moreover, in the last decades, globalization has changed
the world by increasing relations between countries: one of its effects among museums, reflected by
the language of EPAs, is the increasing profile of the noun tour in contrast to the decrease of
country, being the former related to the feasibility of travelling an exhibition (Lord/Lord 2002) and
the latter to small-scale exhibitions, organised at a national level.
178
9. Diachronic structural variation
In the previous chapter lexical variation of EPAs over time was investigated. Next the focus
will be on structural change, which is also relevant for characterizing the diachronic evolution of the
genre, especially if an ESP approach is adopted and the organization of discourse is seen as
reflective of communicative purposes.
Given the volume of the EPA Diacorpus as a whole and considering that this part of the
analysis had to be mainly based on manual observation, it was stipulated to explore a sample of
EPAs randomly selected from the EPA Diacorpus. A number of 60 appeared a reasonable size for
this sample, being equivalent to a sixth of the total (378 EPAs).
The sample was then analysed with regard to macrostructure following Swales’ (1990,
2004) framework for the description of moves and steps and Henry and Roseberry’s (2001) work
for the categorization of moves and steps as optional, core or obligatory. The analysis was also
carried out keeping in mind the standard format of corporate press releases identified by McLaren
and Gurâu (2005) – announcement, elaboration, comment, contact details and editor’s note – and
the structure detected by Bondi (2009:119) for exhibition web-presentations.
The observation of some aspects peculiar of EPAs, such as the use of quotations, narrative
sections, and evaluative language in general, required a wider perspective and necessarily involved
the entire corpus. This part of the analysis has been carried out bearing in mind Hunston’s (2011: 4)
claim that “evaluative language is more suited to text-based than to corpus-based enquiry”. When
looking at the use of linguistic means of emotional appeal in particular, qualitative analysis
becomes essential. Evaluation is often expressed in a cumulative and implicit way; moreover, no set
of grammatical or lexical forms can entirely encompass the range of expressions of evaluation.
9.1 The evolution from a basic to a more complex model
As highlighted by the pilot study preliminarily carried out (see section 6.1 of this thesis),
which took into consideration two extremes of the EPA Diacorpus – EPAs issued in the 1950s and
EPAs issued in the 2000s - , a first impression is that both British and American museum press
officers were still developing a standard structure for this genre in the 1950s, with a little more
confidence shown by American writers in terms of self promotion strategies and knowledge of press
needs. Yet a prototypical common scheme may be highlighted already from the very start of the
genre. It was comprised of three main moves: (1) a brief announcement of the exhibition, (2) a long
explanatory section on the topic, and (3) some pieces of information specific for the professional
179
community of press members, soliciting their response, although in a very implicit way. This basic
scheme is summarized by the table below (tab.9.1):
1 ANNOUNCING THE EXHIBITION
2 PRESENTING THE EXHIBITION
3 SOLICITING PRESS RESPONSE
Tab. 9.1 – Prototypical structure of EPAs (1950): three main moves
In comparison with earlier instances, contemporary EPAs show a more stable and recursive
structure, which confirms the former prototypical macrostructure – an announcing paragraph, an
elaboration of the subject, mostly descriptive, and a final part aiming to create further contact with
the press – with the addition of two new moves, that were barely developed in the 1950s and were
retrieved only among American earlier EPAs: one establishing credentials for the exhibition by
stating its credits, such as organization, curatorship and sponsorship, and one providing technical
information for visitors (opening hours, free or charged admission, how to buy tickets, collateral
events, etc...). We may therefore assume that the ultimate macrostructure of EPAs, or at least the
one that gained more success from 1950 onwards, is comprised of five main moves, as illustrated by
the next table (tab. 9.2):
1 ANNOUNCING THE EXHIBITION
2 PRESENTING THE EXHIBITION
3 ESTABLISHING CREDENTIALS FOR THE EXHIBITION
4 PROVIDING INFORMATION FOR VISITORS
5 SOLICITING PRESS RESPONSE
Tab.9.2 – Ultimate structure of EPAs (2000): five main moves
To reinforce this statement on the structural stability of contemporary EPAs is also the
result of a previous study carried out on a corpus of 120 EPAs issued by British and American
museums between 2008 and 2009 (Lazzeretti 2010), which revealed a very recursive structure as
typical of the genre, when this is observed from a synchronic, contemporary perspective. Thus,
structural stability is the final result of a gradual development, starting from a very fuzzy initial
stage and realized through a series of intermediate steps. Only a diachronic perspective can allow us
to recognize what happened in between these extremes and –more interestingly – when it happened.
The following diachronic analysis aims therefore at detecting turning points and motivating
180
structural change over decades, from 1950 onwards, in order to perfect the final macrostructure
highlighted by previous studies (Lazzeretti 2010).
A more refined description of the ultimate EPAs structure has to take into consideration not
only the moves, but also the steps that may be embedded in each move. Given the premise that it is
not always obligatory for the writer to use all the identified moves and steps and that there is a
certain degree of freedom in the sequencing, the analysis carried out in the pilot study related to the
2000’s decade allowed to enrich the basic five-move structure with a series of steps and to outline a
sort of ideal, ultimate scheme, as illustrated by the following enhanced table:
Move
1 ANNOUNCING THE EXHIBITION
1.1 title
1.2 subtitle
1.3 dates
1.4 location
2 PRESENTING THE EXHIBITION
2.1 general aim
2.2 artworks' number
2.3 description of artworks on display
2.4 biography of the featured artist/s
2.5 list of the artists on display
2.6 exhibition's sections
2.7 exhibition's tour
2.8 catalogue
ESTABLISHING CREDENTIALS FOR THE
3 EXHIBITION
3.1 organisation
3.2 curatorship
3.3 sponsorship
4 PROVIDING INFORMATION FOR VISITORS
4.1 opening hours
4.2 admission
4.3 tickets price
4.4 collateral events
5 SOLICITING PRESS RESPONSE
5.1 contact for press enquiries
5.2 press view
5.3 suggested publishing date
5.4 images for the press
Tab.9.3 – Ultimate complete macrostructure of contemporary EPAs: moves and steps
181
The first move, which was called announcing the exhibition, informs the readers that a new
artistic event is going to be held. It may be very brief, consisting of one or two sentences, or even be
conveyed by the headline of the press release itself. Title, period and location of the exhibition (step
1.1 , 1.3, 1.4) are the most important information to be conveyed in this part of the press release and
should not be omitted: they can appear in the press release headline, which is not necessarily the
same as the exhibition title, or be incorporated in the first paragraph. A subtitle (step 1.2) may be
included, as a further guidance into the theme of the show.
The purpose of the second move, which was called presenting the exhibition, is to introduce
the general aim of the show (step 2.1) and then to focus on the featured artist/s and the works on
display (steps 2.2 and 2.3). The authors of the press release can also present the artist summarising
his biography (step 2.4). In case of group exhibitions, a list of the artists – complete or partial – can
be provided (step 2.5). If the exhibition is divided into sections, they may be mentioned and
described (step 2.6). Information regarding the exhibition's tour in other countries can be included
(step 2.7). It is also worth noting the mention of the catalogue, to be considered as a complementary
part of the exhibition (step 2.8).
The overall communicative purpose of move 3, establishing credentials for the exhibition, is
to provide information on the organization of the exhibition (step 3.1), mentioning the name of
curators (step 3.2), sponsors and supporters (step 3.3), who gain advantage in terms of image and
self-promotion. While the mention of the curator, especially if he is a well-known one, can add
value to the exhibition, citing the sponsors and the supporters is a necessary reward to those who
financially contributed to the event. In the fourth move, which is called providing information for
visitors, useful information is given on details regarding opening hours (step 4.1), admission to the
venue (step 4.2), tickets price (step 4.3), and, if available, a program of collateral events (step 4.4),
such as lectures and films related to the topic of the exhibition.
The fifth and final move, soliciting press response, solicits enquiries from the press, for
instance encouraging a call to the museum press office and the request of further material (step 5.1).
In the same way, the invitation to a press preview (step 5.2) and the suggestion of a specific date for
releasing the news (step 5.3) are a way for catching journalists’ attention and aims at encouraging a
phone call or a face-to-face encounter. Eventually, the availability of press images (step 5.4) has
great importance for media people and especially since the introduction of colour photographs in
the 1960s (see Sloan/Purcell 2002) journalists have been increasingly asking for good images.
Providing them is therefore a way to stimulate and facilitate their work.
182
A model for the ultimate and most comprehensive structure of EPAs has been described so
far; next, the sample will be analysed in respect of the presence – or absence – of the moves and
steps outlined, producing related statistics to be graphically represented with tables. Different
colours will be used in order to highlight obligatory, core and optional moves within the tables:
yellow for obligatory, green for core and lilac for optional. Each decade – 1950, 1960, 1970, 1980,
1990 and 2000 – will be explored separately in the next sections, while some concluding remarks
will be provided at the end of the chapter.
183
9.2 Structure of EPAs in 1950
1950
Freq. %
Move
1 ANNOUNCING THE EXHIBITION 10 100
1.1 title 4 40
1.2 subtitle
1.3 dates 9 90
1.4 location 9 90
2 PRESENTING THE EXHIBITION 10 100
2.1 general aim 8 80
2.2 artworks' number 6 60
2.3 description of artworks on display 8 80
2.4 biography of the featured artist/s 3 30
2.5 list of the artists on display 3 30
2.6 exhibition's sections 1 10
2.7 exhibition's tour
2.8 catalogue 3 30
ESTABLISHING CREDENTIALS FOR THE
3 EXHIBITION 2 20
3.1 organisation 2 20
3.2 curatorship
3.3 sponsorship
4 PROVIDING INFORMATION FOR VISITORS 2 20
4.1 opening hours 2 20
4.2 admission 2 20
4.3 tickets price
4.4 collateral events
5 SOLICITING PRESS RESPONSE 5 50
5.1 contact for press enquiries
5.2 press view 6 60
5.3 suggested publishing date 4 40
5.4 images for the press 2 20
Tab. 9.4 - Macrostructure of EPAs in the 1950s
obligatory 90–100
core 50–90
optional <50
184
As suggested by the colours used in Tab. 9.4 and particularly by the predominance of lilac,
denoting optional moves, in respect to yellow and green, denoting obligatory and core, the structure
of EPAs in the 1950s appears only partially developed. A large unbalance indeed can be noted
between the two halves of the scheme: the most developed part is that concerning the
announcement (move 1) and the description of the exhibition (move 2), while credentials (move 3)
and information for visitors (move 4) are lacking. Information specifically devoted to media people
(move 5) is also limited.
It can be deduced that in this phase major emphasis was placed on the definition of contents
featured by exhibitions, to be essentially conveyed within move 1 and 2, both found to be obligatory
in the 1950 decade.
After a brief announcement of the exhibition, which can be even embedded in the title of the
press release, EPA writers go directly to the point, describing general characteristics and aims of the
exhibition, presenting the artists and the works on display (steps 2.1 – 2.6). They may also stress
different aspects, according to the specificities of the institutions they belong. EPAs issued by the
National Gallery, for instance, provide plenty of details on technical aspects, such as the state of
conservation of art works, restoration cases, and problems of attribution. The following extract (1)
gives an example of this kind of approach:
(1)
RELEASE FROM THE NATIONAL GALLERY
FRANCIA'S "VIRGIN AND CHILD WITH AN ANGEL" AT THE NATIONAL GALLERY
"The Virgin and Child with an Angel" attributed to Francesco Francia (ca.1450-1517/8) came to the
National Gallery in 1924 with the Mond Bequest. This was the most important bequest received by the National
Gallery in this century. It included pictures by such famous Italian artists as Mantegna, Bellini and Botticelli,
Raphael and Titian. The picture bearing the signature of Francia was therefore a not very important item in the
bequest , and since 1939 it has not been exhibited to the public. It attracted attention last year, however, when the
suspicion arose that it might be a forgery.
This was due to the appearance, in a dirty condition, of another version at the Morgan Grenville sale at
Christie 's on 18 June 1954, and its subsequent cleaning for Mr. Leonard Keetser, the purchaser. Mr. Koetser
informed the Director of the National Gallery of his purchase and was invited immediately to bring his picture to
the Gal lery for comparison. When the two were finally placed side by side, no obvious aesthetic differences were
visible. The Morgan Grenville version, however, showed greater signs of age in its craquelure. The Director told
Mr. Koetser that he did not doubt the authenticity of the Morgan Grenville picture, and promised that the Mond
version should receive a full technical investigation in case it contained factual proof of comparative modernity.
[…]
(London, National Gallery, Francia’s Virgin and Child with an Angel, 12 May 1955)
185
Instead, EPAs issued by a very different – private - institution, the Solomon R. Guggenheim
Museum, show a major concern for the provenance of the works on display and report accurately
the names of loaners, as a priority information to be conveyed in the introductory section of the
press release (2):
(2)
THE SOLOMON R. GUGGENHEIM FOUNDATION 120 Broadway New York 5, N. Y.
Rector 2-9740
Released for Publication in Newspapers of Wednesday, June 8, 1955
June 3 , 1955
Harry F. Guggenheim, Chairman of the Board of Trustees of The Solomon R. Guggenheim Foundation,
announces that on Wednesday, June 8th, the Museum of the Foundation at 1071 Fifth Avenue will open to the
public a retrospective exhibition of the PAINTINGS, DRAWINGS AND SCULPTURE OF ALBERTO
GIACOMETTI. There will be a Press View on Tuesday, June 7th, between 11 A.M. and 3 P.M.; and an
invita tion Preview Tuesday June 7th, between three and six o'clock.
This will be the first major comprehensive exhibition of Alberto Giacometti's work to be held in a museum in the
United States or abroad.
Among the Museums which have helped towards the exhibition with loans are The Baltimore Museum of Art
and the Museum of Modern Art. And among the private collectors who have collaborated are Mr. and Mrs. J. W.
Alsdo rf, Winnetka; Mr. Parouir Beglarian, Paris; Mr. L. G. Clayeux, Parisj Mrs. Marcel Duchamp, New York;
Mr. William N. Eisendrath, Jr., St. Louis; Mr. and Mrs. Leland Hayward, New York; Mr. and Mrs. Fernand
Leval, New York Mr. Julien Levy, Bridgewater, Connecticut; Mr. and Mrs. Alexander Liberman; New York;
Mr. and Mrs. Samuel A. Marx, Chicago; Mr. and Mrs. Pierre Matisse New York; Mrs. Rollie McKenna, New
York; Mr. and Mrs. William S. Paley, New York; Mr. Billy Rose, Mount Kisco; Miss Jean Stein, New York; Mr.
G. Da vid Thompson, Pittsburgh; Mr. and Mrs. Charles Zadok, Milwaukee; Galerie Maeght, Paris; Pierre Matisse
Gallery, New York; Saidie A. May Collection, The Baltimore Museum of Art; The Museum of Modern Art,
New York. […]
(New York, Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum, Alberto Giacometti, 3 June 1955)
Such detailed list, surely not appealing in terms of communication, could compensate
somehow the need for establishing credentials for the exhibition, a move which is scarcely
represented in this decade, as it appears only in 20% of the cases.
It is curious to note that a title for the exhibition is not perceived as obligatory – step 1.1 is
optional in this decade – and a subtitle is never provided. Evidently, the importance of a title as a
powerful tool of communication had still to be discovered and was underestimated in the 1950s.
Conversely, the idea of associating the exhibition with a publication (step 2.8) is already drafted,
although in an understated way, with no reference to its sale, as shown in the extract below (3):
(3)
The set-designer, H.G. Adam, one of the foremost modern sculptors in France, is responsible not only for the decor
but also for the masks. One of these masks serves as cover to the catalogue of the exhibition.
(London, Victoria&Albert Museum, French Theatre Art, 1 March 1955)
186
Another striking element in the analysis of the structure of EPAs belonging to this decade is
the scarce attention reserved to common visitors in respect to journalists: move 4, providing
information for visitors, is optional, appearing in only 30% of the EPAs, while move 5, soliciting
press response, is core, as it appears in 50%. A possible explanation could be that in the 1950 EPAs
were essentially perceived in terms of an expert-to-expert communication and not meant for lay
people. As a consequence, the content conveyed by EPAs could be technical or focused on a very
specific aspect, because they addressed professionals mostly interested in the cultural issues
touched by exhibitions. Conversely, basic information, such as opening hours or terms of
admission, were not considered newsworthy items and could be omitted. The urge for attracting
visitors by offering a service or a series of facilities was still to come.
However, even if move 5 is core, a contact for press enquiries (step 5.1) is never provided,
which is non-sense in terms of media relations. The most developed step within move 5 is the
mention of a press view scheduled on a certain date (step 5.2), while in lesser cases a date for
publishing is suggested or the availability of photographs is signalled. This could reflect the scarcity
of press officers in charge at the time, although, as already pointed out in this thesis (see section
1.1), professional press officers were already employed by museums since the 1950s, at least in the
United States. Moreover, in the 1950s information specific for mediapeople, soliciting their
response, is often conveyed in a very implicit way, with short sentences placed at the very
beginning or at the end of the EPA like this handout admits, photographers are welcome, etc.
Further evidence of the confusion surrounding the genre of EPAs, its features but also its
constraints in this decade, is the inconsistent stance adopted by writers: among EPAs dating to the
1950s two cases were found where the author speaks in singular first person, providing his personal
view on the topic in the concluding paragraph of the press release. These are odd cases, because, as
Jacobs (1999a) pointed out, there are hardly any first person pronouns used in press releases. It
would be “unexpected, to say the least”, he notes, because press releases are issued when companies
or institutions “want to say something about themselves (Jacobs 1999b: 220)”. Instead he finds that
“it is a characteristic feature of the production of press releases that self-referencing is almost
exclusively realized in the third person, in particular through the use of the organization’s proper
name” (1999b: 220). This turns out to be true also for EPAs, in their contemporary version, but, as
corpus evidence shows, cannot be taken for granted in earlier stages of development of the genre.
A relevant extract with singular first person reference, taken from an EPA dated to 1955, is
provided in the box below (4):
187
(4)
The conclusion to be drawn from this presentation seems to me to be that there is a great diversity in theatre decor
which i s the result more of the originality and personality of its creators than of any central line of direction.
Masks, which are quite frequently used, and marionettes, which are experiencing a new popularity thanks to
designers such as Y. Joly, complete the exhibition.
(London, Victoria&Albert Museum, French Theatre Art, 1 March 1955
Reading this extract one may have the impression that the writer confuses the genre of
EPAs with that of an essay, where the writer’s view on the topic is normally expressed in the
concluding paragraph. It has been already pointed out that EPAs reflect a multiple authorship (see
chapter 1 of this thesis). This EPA is not signed, but we may presume that here the author coincides
with the curator, as he defines his writing a “presentation” – although it is not clear if he is actually
addressing the press release or the noun refers to the exhibition – and gives a personal interpretation
of the topic issued by the exhibition. Otherwise, we could guess that the original text behind the
press release is a draft of the exhibition concept written by a curator, which has not been later edited
according to the standards of a press release. Anyway, the result of this inaccurate recycling is not
good in communicative terms: the reader gains the idea of a very naïve perspective, as the statement
is anonymous and cannot be attributed to an authoritative speaker.
Summing up, the general impression related to the 1950 structure of EPAs reminds of a
genre that was still in nuce at the time: museum press officers were still developing a standard
structure and although communicative purposes were essentially clear to writers – to announce the
exhibition and to describe its content – , their strategies to pursue them were varied and sometimes
unpredictable. Moreover, the 1950 structure shows a scarce awareness of the genre in terms of
relations to media people, who are not clearly addressed by the EPAs and, most of all, do not
provide a contact especially meant for them.
188
9.3 Structure of EPAs in 1960
1960
Freq. %
Move
1 ANNOUNCING THE EXHIBITION 10 100
1.1 title 6 60
1.2 subtitle
1.3 dates 7 70
1.4 location 5 50
2 PRESENTING THE EXHIBITION 10 100
2.1 general aim 5 50
2.2 artworks' number 4 40
2.3 description of artworks on display 5 50
2.4 biography of the featured artist/s 5 50
2.5 list of the artists on display 1 10
2.6 exhibition's sections 2 20
2.7 exhibition's tour 1 10
2.8 catalogue 4 40
3 ESTABLISHING CREDENTIALS FOR THE EXHIBITION 5 50
3.1 organisation 3 30
3.2 curatorship 1 10
3.3 sponsorship 2 20
4 PROVIDING INFORMATION FOR VISITORS 3 30
4.1 opening hours 2 20
4.2 admission 2 20
4.3 tickets price
4.4 collateral events
5 SOLICITING PRESS RESPONSE 10 100
5.1 contact for press enquiries 5 50
5.2 press view 6 60
5.3 suggested publishing date 6 60
5.4 images for the press 5 50
Tab. 9.5 – Macrostructure of EPAs in the 1960s
obligatory 90–100
core 50–90
optional <50
189
The analysis of the structure of EPAs in the 1960 decade shows a turning point in terms of
development of the genre. As it can be seen in table 9.5, in the first place, all basic moves –
announcement, presentation, and address to the press – become obligatory and can be highlighted in
yellow; second, all possible options to present the contents of the exhibition within move 2 are
represented as core or optional, in green or lilac, according to their different frequency. Moreover,
the establishing credential move (move 3) becomes core, and the first mention of curatorial roles
and to sponsors is to be noted; yet the attention towards visitors and their need to be informed about
basic issues, such as opening hours and admission, is still limited. Eventually, all steps soliciting
press response within move 5 are fully represented in green as core. Each of these salient changes is
going to be discussed in turn.
With regard to the announcement, no particular change is to be registered in respect to the
1950 decade: step 1.1, providing the exhibition title, has become core, while a subtitle is still
missing. However, exhibition titles are not particularly elaborated in this decade, but rather didactic,
and often coincide with the name of the artist featured by the exhibition, as in the case of ‘Mark
Rothko’, held by the Museum of Modern Art in 1961, or ‘Rembrandt’s Drawings and Prints in the
Frick Collection’ (1968), or ‘Roy Lichtenstein at the Guggenheim’ (1969). A more intriguing title is
that provided by the Chicago Museum of Contemporary Art in 1969 for an exhibition showing art
proposals submitted by telephone: ‘Art by Telephone’. This was the first exhibition to focus on the
possibilities of remote-control creation of art and involved 39 artists from across the United States
and Europe, from Sol Lewitt to Bruce Nauman, Claes Oldenburg and Richard Serra. It can be
guessed that the increasing creativity in visual arts during the 1960s was influencing also exhibiting
choices and related communication strategies, starting from the definition of more captivating
exhibition titles.
Steps 1.3 and 1.4, identifying respectively the opening period and the venue, are core in the
1960s, while they were obligatory in the 1950s: this slight difference has not to be read as a
regression, but is due to the sample of EPAs collected for this part of the analysis, which, for its
limited dimension, requires a certain flexibility in the interpretation of data. As a matter of fact, a
general progression in the structure cannot be denied, if we take into consideration the whole
development of moves and steps shown by table 9.5.
All possible steps comprised within move 2 are now represented: a general statement about
the exhibition (step 2.1), description of artworks (step 2.3) and biography of artists (step 2.4) appear
in 50% of the sample and are therefore highlighted in green as core; the other steps appear with a
190
lower frequency and are therefore optional, but some of them are used for the first time, such as the
one reporting about the exhibition’s travel across further venues. The opportunity to host major
travelling exhibitions is to be put in relation to a widening art scene, where the transport of art
works becomes gradually easier and exchanges among international art venues become are
encouraged. Step 2.8 – signalling a catalogue – increases in respect to the previous decade and the
presence of a publication accompanying the exhibition is signalled in a more commercial way, as in
the following extract appearing as a footnote of the EPA (5):
(5)
MARK ROTHKO by Peter Selz. 44 pages, 29 photos (6 in color). Published by the Museum of Modern Art, New
York. Distributed by Doubleday and Co., Inc. $2, 25.
(New York, Museum of Modern Art, Mark Rothko, 18 January 1961)
However, the most important development associated with this decade is maybe that
concerning the establishing credentials move (move 3). The exhibition becomes to be
contextualized not only in respect to the institution in the background, which carries organizational
responsibility, but also in respect to curators and sponsors. Steps 3.2 and 3.3, identifying
respectively the mention of curators and sponsors, appear for the first time in this decade, although
their use is still very limited and, as lilac colour shows in table 9.5, they are still optional.
The mention of the role of curator, bound to become a key-figure in the following decades,
is provided in the 1960s as in the following example (6):
(6)
The exhibition was prepared by Diane Waldman, Associate Curator of the Guggenheim Museum, who has written a
critical introduction to the artist in the illustrated catalogue of the show. In the opening paragraphs Mrs. Waldman
points out the limitations of the term ‘pop art’, which is inadequate, she says, for a fully, understanding of the work
of Lichtenstein or of any other major ‘pop artist’.
(New York, Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum, Roy Lichtenstein, 21 November 1969)
In this case, the mention of a curator is not only functional to establishing credential for the
exhibition, but allows to enrich the presentation of contents with a series of pertinent scientific
comments, belonging to an expert in the field and therefore perceived as particularly sound.
Curatorial statements reinforce the scientific value of the exhibition and will be increasingly used
191
by EPA writers over decades, especially in the form of direct quotations, a point to be further
discussed in a subsequent section of this chapter.
While the mention of the curator, especially if he is a well-known one, can add value to the
exhibition, citing the sponsors and the supporters is a necessary reward to those who financially
contributed to the event. Form the 1960s onward acknowledgements of sponsors, donors and other
benefactors become recurrent and very static in terms of phraseology. A typical pattern is the___
is/was made possible by, where the slot in this frame can be filled with words such as exhibition,
catalogue, programme, and other similar expressions. This pattern has 40 occurrences in the EPA
Diacorpus and the first to be found, belonging to the 1960 decade, is reported in the following
extract (7):
(7)
The acq uisition has been made possible by the generosity of the Trustees of the Wolfson Foundation, who have
promised a contribution of £100,000. The remaining £40,000 will be contributed by a Special Exchequer Grant.
(London, National Gallery, Goya’s Duke of Ellington, 3 August 1961)
While for move 1, 2, 3 and 5 we can highlight a major development, with regard to move 4,
providing information for visitors, only minor change is to be noted: in the 1960s the move is still
optional as in the 1950s, as it appears in less than 50% of the cases. Information regarding the
admission, for instance, appears only in 2 out of 10 EPAs, while the price of tickets is never
mentioned. Collateral events are also not introduced yet.
Conversely, the development of move 5, soliciting press response, is relevant: the move
becomes obligatory, as it appears in all the EPAs collected in the sample, and the entire array of
steps is represented as core. The most important change regarding this move is the indication of a
contact for press enquiries in 50% of the cases, which was missing in the 1950s; the frequency of
steps concerning a press preview and suggesting a publishing date (step 5.2 and step 5.3) does not
drastically increase in respect to the 1950s, while information on images available for the press
(step 5.4) gains more importance in this decade, maybe as a consequence of the increasing role
played by colour photographs in newspapers and periodicals from 1960 onwards (see Sloan/Purcell
2002). Colour pictures were difficult to process and print and therefore were used only on special
occasion and special sections before they became common in the 1960s. In the 1970s more
advanced technology allowed for ease in colour processing and especially in the 1980s and the
1990s the use of colour photographs was improved by the industry’s move to offset printing.
192
In conclusion, the structure highlighted by EPA in the 1960s shows an important step
forward towards the definition of the genre of EPAs as we know it: the basic moves (1, 2 and 5) are
consolidated, while the attention towards visitors (move 4) and media people (move 5) is slightly
increasing.
193
9.4 Structure of EPAs in 1970
1970
Freq. %
Move
1 ANNOUNCING THE EXHIBITION 10 100
1.1 title 5 50
1.2 subtitle 3 30
1.3 dates 9 90
1.4 location 9 90
2 PRESENTING THE EXHIBITION 10 100
2.1 general aim 7 70
2.2 artworks' number 6 60
2.3 description of artworks on display 5 50
2.4 biography of the featured artist/s 6 60
2.5 list of the artists on display 1 10
2.6 exhibition's sections 2 20
2.7 exhibition's tour 2 20
2.8 catalogue 2 20
3 ESTABLISHING CREDENTIALS FOR THE EXHIBITION 6 60
3.1 organisation 3 30
3.2 curatorship 6 60
3.3 sponsorship 4 40
4 PROVIDING INFORMATION FOR VISITORS 7 70
4.1 opening hours 4 40
4.2 admission 5 50
4.3 tickets price 3 30
4.4 collateral events 2 20
5 SOLICITING PRESS RESPONSE 10 100
5.1 contact for press enquiries 8 80
5.2 press view 6 60
5.3 suggested publishing date 4 40
5.4 images for the press 1 10
Tab. 9.6 – Macrostructure of EPAs in the 1970s
obligatory 90–100
core 50–90
optional <50
194
The progression in terms of development of moves and steps shown by 1960 EPAs
continues in the 1970s with a further consolidation.
Move 1 – announcing the exhibition – is still obligatory as it was in the previous decades,
but the definition of exhibition titles enters a phase of major elaboration, with a first appearance of
the step related to subtitles (step 1.2), and the indication of dates (step 1.3) and location (step 1.4)
becomes an unavoidable necessity. No major change is to be noted with regard to move 2 –
presenting the exhibition – although the number of art works on display in particular seems to gain
importance among the steps. Move 3 – establishing credentials for the exhibition – remains core,
but the importance of curators (step 3.2) increases. The most interesting change concerns move 4 –
providing information for visitors – which can be highlighted in green as core for the first time:
more specifically, the step related to admission (step 4.2) becomes core, while those conveying
information about tickets price (step 4.3) and collateral events (step 4.4) are introduced for the first
time as optional. Eventually, move 5 – soliciting press response – is still obligatory, but the
frequency of a press contact (step 5.2) increases from 50% in the previous decade to 80%.
Let us begin with the evolution of exhibition titles in this decade: while in many cases the
habit to entitle the exhibition with the name of the featured artist remains, a new tendency is
highlighted in the 1970s, which is to accompany the main title with a further subtitle. This practice
aims at anticipating and explaining the contents of the exhibition, as the following examples show
(8, 9):
(8)
Dante Gabriel Rossetti: Painter and Poet which is due to open at the Royal Academy on 13th January 1973 is the
first large-scale exhibition since 1883 devoted solely to this founder member of the Pre-Raphaelite Brotherhood.
[…]. First of all there are the paintings and drawings produced while Rossetti was an active member of the Pre-
Raphae lite Brotherhood.[…] The two other groups here show subjects drawn from Dante's poems, some of which
Rossetti himself had translated in 1848, and the "Morte d'Arthur", which were the sources of greatest inspiration for
his pain ting and drawing at this date. The peculiarly mystical, medieval atmosphere of these "romances" appealed
strongly to his poetic imagination… […]
(London, Royal Academy of Art, Dante Gabriel Rossetti, 1 January 1972)
(9)
THE ART OF HOLLYWOOD
Fifty years of Art Direction
In the most recent and respected biographical dictionary of films and filming there is an 87-line entry for DAY,
DORIS but none for DAY, RICHARD. Yet Richard Day designed more than fifty major productions in a career
which began in the 20s with films like 'Foolish Wives', 'Greed' and 'The Merry Widow', and continued through to
the 50s with 'On The Waterfront' and 'A Streetcar Named Desire'. In this new exhibition, […] the often
unrecognised work of Day and other great art directors of the American cinema is presented in the form of film,
original designs, sketches, stills and reconstructions. […]
(London, Victoria&Albert Museum, Art of Hollywood, 1 August 1979)
195
In both extracts the use of subtitle allows to add details to the main information provided by
the title, guiding the readers and offering them a hint to better understand the curatorial choices: in
the first example (8), for instance, visitors can gather since the very beginning of the text – namely,
from the exhibition title – that the exhibition takes into consideration not only the work of Dante
Gabriel Rossetti as a painter, but also as a poet; the concept is further explained in the following
lines of the EPA. In the second example (9) the combination of title and subtitle also allows to grasp
an idea of what the exhibition is about, because a series of contextual words are used (art,
Hollywood, direction). Moreover, a chronological reference is provided – fifty years of – able to
define the relevant period of analysis.
As previously pointed out, the observation of move 2 – presenting the exhibition – during
the 1970s does not present relevant changes in respect to the previous decade: steps from 2.1 to 2.4
are core, as they appear in more the 50% of the investigated cases, while steps from 2.5 to 2.8 are
optional. However, the analysis of EPAs belonging to this decade revealed a significant element:
from the 1970s onward the descriptive sections of EPAs – mostly identified within move 2 – are
characterized by a more relevant presence of narrative sections and emotional language. To the
explanation of what is meant here for narrative and how it is used in EPAs is devoted a following
section of this chapter (9.9).
Let us go back to the analysis of structure of EPAs in the 1970s. In this decade move 3 –
establishing credentials – remains core, but among its steps one in particular gains importance, that
associated with the mention of curators (step 3.2). This step, which was absent during the 1950s and
optional in the 1960s, is now core, as it appears in 60% of the investigated cases. The mention of
curators is not only important in quantitative terms and goes beyond a simple form of
acknowledgement: as already pointed out, EPA writers underline the authoritative role played by
curators in shaping the exhibition and their distinguished position in the art world, spending more
than a few words for them within the EPA. In the following extract, for instance, a clear distinction
is made between a professional in charge of the selection of works to be exhibited and the colleague
in charge of the design of the exhibition (10):
(10)
The works have been chosen and selected by a distinguished committee of scholars, including Mrs. Virginia
Surtees, author of the recent catalogue raisonné on Rossetti. The exhibition specially designed by Christopher
Firmstone, has been arranged, partly chronologically, to show the artist's development, but also, more importantly,
by grou ping works of a similar nature or subject matter, to reveal the various themes which occupied the artist's
imagination at different stages during his life and career.
(Londo n, Royal Academy of Art, Dante Gabriel Rossetti, 1 January 1972)
196
In the next example (11) a further value to the exhibition is provided by the case of a
personal acquaintance between the curator and the artist featured:
(11)
The exhibition and the fully illustrated catalogue with text by guest curator Caroline Tisdall, the English critic who
has wo rked closely with the artist for a number of years, are supported by grants from the National Endowment for
the Arts in Washington, D. C., a Federal Agency, and the German Federal Republic.
(New Y ork, Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum, Joseph Beuys, 1 November 1979)
The analysis of structure suggests that in the 1970s visitors become a relevant item in terms
of museum public relations: move 4 – providing information for visitors – appears in 60% of the
investigate cases and can be therefore highlighted in green, as core. The same move was only
optional during the 1950s and the 1960s. Information regarding the admission (step 4.2), in
particular, is provided in 50% of the cases, while for the first time the price of tickets (step 4.3) can
be retrieved in the text of EPAs. This crucial information can be conveyed at the very beginning, as
in example 12, or at the end of the press release, as in example 13:
(12)
Press Release
Royal Academy of Arts
Impressionism - its Masters, Precursors and its influence in Britain
From 9th February - 28th April 1974
Press Day: Thursday 7th February 10 a.m. - 5.30 p.m.
Priva te View: Friday 8th February 10 a.m. - 6p.m.
Open Daily: 10-6 (Sundays 2-6)
Adm ission: 50p (Mondays 30p)
(London, Royal Academy of Art, Impressionism, 1 February 1974)
(13)
DATES: 3 October Until 13 January 1980.
Closed Fridays and 24 to 26 December inclusive and Tuesday 1 January.
ADMISSION: £1.25. Children, Students, OAPs: 50p.
PRES S VIEW: Tuesday 2 October, 11.00 until 15.00.
LOCATION: Room 45, V & A.
LECT URES: There will be a series of free lunchtime talks followed by full length
feature films on Wednesdays from October 17 to November 21 inclusive in the V & A Lecture Theatre.
Issued: August 1979.
(London, Victoria&Albert Museum, Art of Hollywood, 1 August 1979)
197
Example (13) shows also evidence of the first introduction of step 4.4 – collateral events –
within the structure of EPAs: a series of free lectures and films on topics related to the exhibition is
offered to the public during the exhibiting period. This is also a sign of newly discovered attention
toward visitors and goes hand in hand with the introduction of charged admission: collateral events
provide additional value to the exhibition in terms of cultural opportunities, as they allow to better
understand contents, but also arouse the interest in the event and aim to attract more paying visitors.
Finally, the observation of move 5, soliciting press response, does not provide relevant
variation in the 1970s: the move is still obligatory, as it appears in all the EPAs collected in the
sample, and the entire array of steps is represented as core or optional.
It can be concluded that the most important achievement related to the development of EPAs
structure in this decade is the importance gained by visitors in the consideration of museum
professionals, in consideration of the adoption of tickets, reflected by the increasing frequency of
related move and steps. With regard to the other moves and steps we can observe a general
consolidation of the structure, characterized, as we move forward, by a gradual predominance of
yellow and green colors – denoting obligatory and core structural elements – in respect to white and
lilac – denoting, respectively, absent and optional elements.
198
9.5 Structure of EPAs in 1980
1980
Freq. %
Move
1 ANNOUNCING THE EXHIBITION 10 100
1.1 title 9 90
1.2 subtitle 6 60
1.3 dates 9 90
1.4 location 7 70
2 PRESENTING THE EXHIBITION 10 100
2.1 general aim 9 90
2.2 artworks' number 6 60
2.3 description of artworks on display 6 60
2.4 biography of the featured artist/s 4 40
2.5 list of the artists on display 1 10
2.6 exhibition's sections 2 20
2.7 exhibition's tour 3 30
2.8 catalogue 6 60
3 ESTABLISHING CREDENTIALS FOR THE EXHIBITION 6 60
3.1 organisation 4 40
3.2 curatorship 4 40
3.3 sponsorship 6 60
4 PROVIDING INFORMATION FOR VISITORS 9 90
4.1 opening hours 2 20
4.2 admission 5 50
4.3 tickets price 3 30
4.4 collateral events 7 70
5 SOLICITING PRESS RESPONSE 10 100
5.1 contact for press enquiries 9 90
5.2 press view 5 50
5.3 suggested publishing date 3 30
5.4 images for the press 3 30
Tab. 9.7 – Macrostructure of EPAs in the 1980s
obligatory 90–100
core 50–90
optional <50
199
The 1980’s decade is one of consolidation and homogenization for the structure of EPAs.
Looking at table 9.7, the most striking aspect is that 4 moves out of 5 are now highlighted in
yellow, as they all have become obligatory, with the exception of move 4 – establishing credentials
for the exhibition – which is still core. Among steps, 4 have become obligatory (step 1.1, 1.3, 2.1
and 5.1), 9 are core (step 1.2, 1.4, 2.2, 2.3, 2.8, 3.3, 4.2, 4.4 and 5.2) and 9 are optional (step 2.4 –
2.7, 3.1, 3.2, 4.1, 4.3, 5.3, 5.4). As a general premise, it can be pointed out that this decade is not
characterized by dramatic changes, but slight adjustments, culminating in the complete
acknowledgement of the importance of visitors as fundamental actors in the exhibition, with
reciprocal influences on each other.
Within move 1 – announcing the exhibition – step 1.1 becomes obligatory and step 1.2
becomes core (they were respectively core and optional in the previous decade): it means that the
process of shaping exhibition titles and subtitles is still ongoing in the 1980s, requiring a great deal
of experimentation. Along with more elaborated but still didactic titles such as ‘Arshile Gorky, 1904
–1948: A Retrospective’ are the evocative ‘Manet at Work’, ‘Bodylines. The Human Figure in Art’,
‘Art in the Making: Italian Painting before 1400’, which show a different, more creative approach,
maybe reflective of practices typical of advertisements, such as the use of evocative language and
short phrases. Among titles belonging to the 1980’s decade represented by the EPA Diacorpus but
not included in the sample collected for the structural analysis are other interesting cases: ‘Spotlight.
Four Centuries of Ballet Costumes’, ‘Watch this Space’, ‘Inside Spaces’, ‘Angles of Vision: French
Art Today’, ‘After the Manner of Women’. These titles can be read as a clear demonstration of
Bhatia’s words (2004:84): “Advertising has turned the process of writing into an art form, where
writers constantly compete for attention not only by innovative use of language but also by the
creative use of traditional expressions and clichés, which are often shunned by good writers in other
forms of discourse”.
With regard to move 2 – presenting the exhibition –, it is to be noted that the step related to
the mention of a catalogue (2.8) has become core, shifting from a 20% of occurrences in the 1970s
to the 60% in the 1980s. It can be highlighted that, from this decade on, EPAs tend to consistently
associate the exhibition with a catalogue or a publication, as if the exhibiting event was comprised
of two inseparable parts, the show and the publication. The following extracts (14, 15) provide a
selection of examples reflective of this strategy:
(14)
Jewels of the Ancients illustrates the complexity of the culture over a long period and vividly demonstrates the
inte raction between the Near East, Central Asia and the Aegean.
The exhibition is accompanied by a lavishly illustrated catalogue.
(London, Royal Academy of Art, Jewels of the Ancient, 1 May 1987)
200
(15)
The exhibition De Morgan includes both ceramics and original designs and will mark the publication by Richard
Dennis of 'The Designs by William De Morgan'. This catalogue illustrates the Museum's extensive collection of
De Morg an drawings.
(London, Victoria&Albert Museum, William De Morgan, 1 January 1989)
An entire paragraph of the EPA can also be devoted to the mention of the catalogue, with
plenty of details on contents, as in the following example (16):
(16)
PUBLICATION. Andy Warhol: A Retrospective. Introduction by Kynaston McShine.
Essa ys by Robert Rosenblum, Benjamin H. D. Buchloh, and Marco Livingstone. Includes a collective portrait of
the artist, with contributions by artists, writers, and other colleagues; chronology; and bibliography. 480 pages.
277 color and 359 black-and-white illustrations. Published by The Museum of Modern Art. Clothbound volume
distributed by Bui finch Press/Little, Brown and Company, Boston ($60. 00); paperbound available in the
Museum Store only ($35. 00).
(New York, Museum of Modern Art, Andy Warhol, 1 February 1989)
The observation of move 3 – establishing credentials –, does not present relevant variation
in the 1980s: the move is still core, as it appears in 60% of the investigated cases. In respect to the
previous decade, the only increasing step is 3.3 – sponsorship – which goes from 40% in the 1970s
to 60% in the 1980s and therefore becomes core. This data is to be put in relation to a general shift
towards commercial concerns, which is particularly accentuated in this decade and does not involve
only the collection of sponsors and supporters but also the introduction of visitor fees, catalogues
sale, guided tours, and so on. The major change within the structure concerns indeed move 4 –
providing information for visitors –, which becomes obligatory, as it appears in 90% of the cases,
with a significant increase of step 4.4, associated with collateral events, from 20% in the 1970s to
70% in the 1980s. Information regarding a complementary program based on the exhibition is
generally put at the end of the EPA: for instance, a series of ‘lunchtime lectures’, to be announced
in the concluding paragraph, or even ‘a symposium, lecture, and architectural tours’ scheduled
during the run of the exhibition. Particularly relevant are cases where the artist featured by the
exhibition is involved in the program, giving a lecture or an artist talk (17):
(17)
O n January 16 at 6: 30 pm in the Guggenheim Museum Auditorium, the artist will discuss her installations for
outdoor public sites and for interior spaces in a lecture entitled "Jenny Holzer: Public and Private Art. "
( New York, Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum, Jenny Holzer, 11 December 1989)
201
As a further evidence of increasing attention towards visitors, it has to be noted that in this
decade the first mention to acoustic guides was found. The relevant extract (18) is provided below:
(18)
The Education Department at the Royal Academy is offering educational conferences for different groups […]
introductory material has been prepared including a booklet for teachers, a slide pack and Acoustiguide tapes. […]
(London, Royal Academy of Arts, 1 January 1986)
No significant change is to be noted within move 5 – soliciting press response – which
remains obligatory, although the importance of providing a contact for press enquiries is now
definitely recognized, with step 5.1 which also becomes obligatory (it was core in the previous
decades).
Summing up, the 1980s’ decade clearly establishes the need of providing more detailed
information and services for visitors and marks an increasing concern for commercial aspects, such
as sponsorship and catalogue sales. These changes are reflected by the development of the EPA
structure, which gradually gains a more consistent and recursive scheme of moves and steps.
202
9.6 Structure of EPAs in 1990
1990
Freq. %
Move
1 ANNOUNCING THE EXHIBITION 10 100
1.1 title 10 100
1.2 subtitle 9 90
1.3 dates 10 100
1.4 location 6 60
2 PRESENTING THE EXHIBITION 10 100
2.1 general aim 9 90
2.2 artworks' number 9 90
2.3 description of artworks on display 10 100
2.4 biography of the featured artist/s 5 50
2.5 list of the artists on display 1 10
2.6 exhibition's sections 2 20
2.7 exhibition's tour 4 40
2.8 catalogue 10 100
3 ESTABLISHING CREDENTIALS FOR THE EXHIBITION 10 100
3.1 organisation 1 10
3.2 curatorship 10 100
3.3 sponsorship 5 50
4 PROVIDING INFORMATION FOR VISITORS 9 90
4.1 opening hours 3 30
4.2 admission 6 60
4.3 tickets price 3 30
4.4 collateral events 2 20
5 SOLICITING PRESS RESPONSE 10 100
5.1 contact for press enquiries 9 90
5.2 press view 3 30
5.3 suggested publishing date 3 30
5.4 images for the press 3 30
Tab. 9.8 – Macrostructure of EPAs in the 1990s
obligatory 90–100
core 50–90
optional <50
203
Looking at the structure of EPAs in the 1990’s, the first achievement to be noted in respect
to previous decades is that all basic moves – from 1 to 5 – have all become obligatory. In particular,
move 3 – establishing credentials – which was only core so far, now appears in 100% of the
investigated cases and can be therefore highlighted in yellow. Moreover, a quick glimpse to table
9.8 allows to recognize that yellow has become the predominant colour in the structure, since 14
components out of 28 are now obligatory.
The most consolidated move is the announcement (move 1): 3 steps out of 4 – those related
to title, subtitle and dates – have become obligatory and one – that related to location – is core. This
does not come as a surprise, since information conveyed by these steps has to be regarded as basic
for the content of an EPA. Yet, this result suggests that in the 1990s EPAs have reached a point of
major development in terms of awareness of the genre and its related communicative purposes.
From the 1990’s decade on, the way move 1 is performed can determine a mechanical and
repetitive incipit in EPAs, concentrating announcement, dates and location in the first lines of the
text. This scheme is often adopted by EPA writers, despite its limited appeal in terms of
communication. As the following extract (19) shows, such an incipit goes directly to the point,
avoiding premises, and provides all basic information in the space of two lines or even less:
(19)
GETT Y MUSEUM MOUNTS COMPREHENSIVE EXHIBITION OF DAGUERREOTYPES
Early photographs made portraits available to all for the first time
Exhib ition dates: April 14-July 12, 1998
Exhibition location: J. Paul Getty Museum, West Pavilion, Courtyard Level
One of the most comprehensive exhibitions of daguerreotypes ever mounted will be on view at the Getty Center
from April 14 through July 12, 1998. […]
(Los Angeles, J. Paul Getty Museum, Daguerreotypes, 27 March 1998)
Move 2 – presenting the exhibition – is also characterized by a consolidation of its
components in the 1990’s: the most recurring and therefore obligatory steps are 2.1 – 2.3, which
are also the most descriptive and evaluative, and step 2.8, related to the catalogue. This result
suggests that description and evaluation now more than ever play an essential role in the content of
EPAs; a detailed account on art works on display, in particular, is perceived as indispensable. In this
context, essays from the catalogue can be used as a further source of information, description and
evaluation, to be quoted in this central section of the text to reinforce or enrich the general aim of
the exhibition, as in the following extract (20):
204
(20)
Willem de Kooning: The Late Paintings, which finishes its international tour at The Museum of Modern Art, New
York, provides the first opportunity to study in depth the artist's last decade of work. "Of these works, a
significant number count among the most remarkable paintings by anyone active in the 1980s and among the most
distinc tive, graceful, and mysterious de Kooning himself ever made, " writes Robert Storr in the exhibition
catalogue. […]
(New Y ork, Museum of Modern Art, Willem de Kooning, 1 November 1996)
Moreover, the creative potential of evaluative language is exploited by EPA writers with
great awareness in this decade, as the following example (21) shows:
(21)
[…] The variously ethereal, animated, and richly hued works demonstrate a striking formal and emotional range.
Enlivened by sinuous, flowing strokes in radiant primary reds, yellows, and blues, augmented by subtle whites
and strong blacks, and startling greens, oranges, and violets, the paintings reverberate with fragmentary references
to the sexually charged figuration, landscape spaces, and the biomorphic forms of his great Abstract Expressionist
canvases of the 1940s, 50s, and 60s. […]
(New York, Museum of Modern Art, Willem de Kooning, 1 November 1996)
The description here reproduced (21) is taken from a central section of the EPA, coinciding
with move 2; it is a typical example of those direct and straightforward descriptions adopted
especially in contemporary EPAs, in respect to a more didactic style characterizing earlier
descriptions, which, according to the lexical analysis carried out in the previous chapter and in
particular in view of the decline in the frequency of the verbs shown and shows (see section 8.2.3),
have been gradually dismissed. Moreover, the writer proves able to create powerful combinations of
evaluative language and linguistic means of emotional appeal, such as the imaginative sequence
‘variously ethereal, animated, and richly hued works’.
As already anticipated at the beginning of this section, move 3 – establishing credentials –
has become obligatory in the 1990’s decade. It can be useful to remember that this move was just
drafted in the 1950s and becomes core from the 1960s onwards. Its frequency gradually increases
over time. Within this move, step 3.1 – organization – has always remained optional but decreases
over time, maybe because in most of the cases the museum itself is responsible of the organization
and a further mention would sound pleonastic; conversely, the frequency of step 3.2 – curatorship –
and 3.3 – sponsorship – increases and these steps are respectively obligatory and core in the 1990s.
The mention of curator, in particular, is present in 100% of the EPAs of this decade: this is the
result of a gradual development related to this step, started in the 1960s and then grown in the
following decades. Yet, the way this step is performed in the text does not change much in respect
205
to earlier texts: typically, curators are mentioned in the central section of the EPA, before the
description of contents or embedded in the descriptive part. Conversely, in the 1990s the mention of
sponsors (step 3.3), which generally followed the other exhibition credentials, can be anticipated to
the opening lines of the text, as in the example below (22):
(22)
ROYAL ACADEMY OF ARTS PRESS RELEASE
DAVID HOCKNEY
Works on Paper 1959 - 1995
Sackler Galleries
9 November 1995 - 25 January 1996 (closed 24 and 25 December 1995)
Sponsored by BMW (GB) Limited in association with Harpers &Queen
David Hockney is one of the most celebrated living British artists and this exhibition of 140 drawings,
watercolours and gouaches has been gathered from public and private collections worldwide. […]
(London, Royal Academy of Art, David Hockney, 1 November 1995)
The leading role gained by sponsors in the 1990s is highlighted not only by their position
within the structure of EPAs, but also by their repeated presence: in some cases, for instance, in
addition to the textual mention, a graphic logo identifying the sponsor can be provided as a further
promotional element.
No particular change is to be noted with regard to move 4 – providing information for
visitors – which is still obligatory as in the previous decade. The frequency of steps related to this
move registers a slight fluctuation in respect to the 1980s; the mention of collateral events, in
particular, falls to 20% (it was at 70% in the 1980s): we may interpret this decrease as a
consequence of the limited dimensions of the sample, rather than as a regression in terms of
structure. Moreover, it has to be kept in mind that EPAs must focus on the exhibition, while
information about educational programs and collateral events, such as artist talks, films and
workshops related to the exhibition, can be conveyed by other specific press releases, according to
the schedule and the deadlines of the initiatives, which have to be punctually reminded to the media.
More significantly, it has to be kept in mind that from the 1990s decade information can be gained
from a new, innovative source: the web. As a matter of fact, among EPAs belonging to the 1990s
the first mention to a museum website was found. The relevant extract is provided below (23):
(23)
[…] For further information, contact Alexandra Partow, Assistant Director of Communications, The Museum of
Modern Art, 212/708-9756. Visit our Web site at www.moma.org.
(New York, Museum of Modern Art, Willme de Kooning, 1 November 1996)
206
The role of move 5 – soliciting press response – appears quite consolidated in the 1990s and
no relevant change is to be noted in respect to the previous decade: the move is obligatory, as well
as step 5.1, providing a contact for press enquiries, while the other steps are optional.
In conclusion, the observation of EPAs structure in the 1990s confirms that major
developments have been completed and the genre has almost reached its final scheme of moves and
steps.
207
9.7 Structure of EPAs in 2000
2000
Freq. %
Move
1 ANNOUNCING THE EXHIBITION 10 100
1.1 title 10 100
1.2 subtitle 6 60
1.3 dates 10 100
1.4 location 10 100
2 PRESENTING THE EXHIBITION 10 100
2.1 general overview 9 90
2.2 artworks' number 8 80
2.3 description of artworks on display 7 70
2.4 biography of the featured artist/s 3 30
2.5 list of the artists on display 4 40
2.6 exhibition's sections 3 30
2.7 exhibition's tour 3 30
2.8 catalogue 8 80
3 ESTABLISHING CREDENTIALS FOR THE EXHIBITION 10 100
3.1 organisation 5 50
3.2 curatorship 9 90
3.3 sponsorship 10 100
4 PROVIDING INFORMATION FOR VISITORS 9 90
4.1 opening hours 3 30
4.2 admission 5 50
4.3 tickets price 4 40
4.4 collateral events 5 50
5 SOLICITING PRESS RESPONSE 10 100
5.1 contact for press enquiries 8 80
5.2 press view 5 50
5.3 suggested publishing date 0 0
5.4 images for the press 5 50
Tab. 9.9 – Macrostructure of EPAs in the 2000s
obligatory 90–100
core 50–90
optional <50
208
The observation of structure of EPAs across the 2000s shows that the genre has definitely
reached its current shape: all basic moves (from 1 to 5) have become obligatory and all identified
steps are performed, although with different frequency: from obligatory (1.1, 1.3, 1.4, 2.1, 3.2, 3.3)
to core (1.2, 2.2, 2.3, 2.8, 3.1, 4.2, 4.4, 5.1, 5.2, 5.4) , to optional (2.4, , 2.5, 2.6, 2.7, 4.1, 4.3).
As table 9.9 shows, the most stable and recursive components of the structure, where yellow
prevails among other colours, are those announcing the exhibition (move 1) and establishing
credentials (move 3), while a certain deal of variety is shown by the presentation of contents (move
2), whose related steps appear with different frequency, although the most relevant still seem to be
those conveying description and evaluation (2.1, 2.2, 2.3 and 2.8), as already noted in the analysis
of 1990’s decade.
The observation of move 1 across the 2000s allows to appreciate a great communicative
effort in the choice of evocative exhibition titles and subtitles, a process which began, albeit timidly,
in the 1960s: browsing exhibition titles belonging to 2000’s, we find, for instance, “Radical
Fashion”, “The Dawn of the Floating World: 1650 –1765”, “Twilight. Photography in the Magic
Hour”, “Scratch the Surface”, “Blood on Paper: the Art of Book”, all belonging to British
exhibitions, while among the American titles are “Tempo”, “The Arts of Fire: Islamic Influences on
the Italian Renaissance”, “Fashioning Fiction in Photography”, “The Color of Life”. Exhibition
titles can be intentionally left ambiguous or incomplete – step 1.2, related to explanatory subtitle
appears only in 60% of the cases – and sometimes do not sound immediately clear, especially at a
first reading, but they are still very effective as attention-getters: short, often based on emotionally
loaded language, they stick in the memory of readers and visitors. A subtitle can help, but it is
always best to get the show's subject into the main title: listings editors often drop the subtitle, and
busy journalists scan mailboxes for subject headers. It has also to be noted how communication can
be reinforced by a smart combination of such cryptic exhibition titles and a powerful image related
to the exhibition published on the page (see, for instance, figure 1.1 in chapter 1 of this thesis).
With regard to credentials (move 3), the mention of sponsors has even outnumbered that of
curators: namely, both steps are obligatory in this decade, but now sponsors are mentioned in 100%
of the cases, curators in 90%; in respect to the previous decade, the situation is reversed. It could be
guessed that the presence of sponsors in contemporary EPAs goes beyond a mere mention within
the text, or a logo in the header of the sheet. Sponsors may determine exhibiting choices – and
therefore influence related textual communication – in a way which is difficult to measure through
qualitative and quantitative analysis of EPAs. An ethnographic approach could be helpful in this
sense, but it would go beyond the scope of this thesis and would be worth carrying out elsewhere.
209
Within move 4 – providing information for visitors – admission and collateral events are the
most frequent steps and rank as core, appearing in 50% of the cases, while opening hours and
tickets price are still optional, exactly as they were in the previous decades, since their first
appearance, respectively in the 1950s and in the 1970s.
Eventually, move 5 – soliciting press response – shows consistency in the choice of steps in
respect to previous decades, with the only exception of step 5.3 – suggested publishing date – which
suddenly disappears. In order to confirm this finding, derived from the sample of EPAs especially
collected for the scope of structural analysis, all 2000 EPAs of the corpus were checked in this
regard and, as a matter of fact, only three cases of clear suggestion of publishing date were
retrieved, all belonging to the same museum, the J. Paul Getty. See the following example (24):
(24)
GOLDEN GRAVES of ANCIENT VANI
DATE: June 25, 2009 FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE
GETTY VILLA PRESENTS ANCIENT TREASURES FROM THE REPUBLIC OF GEORGIA, THE LAND
O F THE GOLDEN FLEECE
The Golden Graves of Ancient Vani includes four bronze lamps shown together for the first time
At the J. Paul Getty Museum at the Getty Villa July 16-October 5, 2009
[…]
LOS ANGELES—In a spectacular display of archaeological finds, The Golden Graves of Ancient Vani, on view
from July 16-October 5, 2009, at the J. Paul Getty Museum at the Getty Villa, presents more than 140 objects
from one of the most celebrated archaeological sites in the Republic of Georgia, […]
(Los Angeles, J. Paul Getty Museum, Golden Graves, 25 June 2009)
As the extract shows (24), the suggestion of a date for publishing the news content provided
by the EPA sounds a bit intrusive. Moreover, the idea of a press embargo1 has no sense for EPAs,
which are generally sent with a great deal of advance before the exhibition opening. This
anticipation is necessary in order to allow even periodicals and monthly magazines to cover the
news according their closing deadlines, at least three months before publication: an issue to be
published in June, for instance, is prepared in April. It can be guessed that step 5.3 – suggested
publishing date – has been gradually reduced by EPAs, since it has no useful purpose in our days,
especially in view of the advent of news websites, publishing in real time.
1 In journalism and public relations, a news embargo or press embargo is a request by a source that the information or
news provided by that source not be published until a certain date or certain conditions have been met. The
understanding is that if the embargo is broken by reporting before then, the source will retaliate by restricting access to
further information by that journalist or his publication, giving them a long-term disadvantage relative to more
cooperative outlets. They are often used by businesses making a product announcement, by medical journals, and by
government officials announcing policy initiatives; the media is given advance knowledge of details being held secret
so that reports can be prepared to coincide with the announcement date and yet still meet press time. In theory, press
embargoes reduce inaccuracy in the reporting of breaking stories by reducing the incentive for journalists to cut corners
in hopes of "scooping" the competition.
210
In conclusion of the analysis, it can be pointed out that the structure of EPAs in the 2000’s
decade does not present remarkable differences in respect to that highlighted in the 1990’s. The
impression is that in the 2000s the genre of EPAs was going under a process of consolidation, after
a time of rapid and major changes in previous decades. A similar halt in the structure, followed by a
period of readjustment, was also registered in the 1970s after the great developments happened in
the 1950s and the 1960s. If change within the EPAs structure occurs periodically, almost every
twenty/thirty years, it could be expected that new developments are going to be introduced in the
current and next decades, those of 2010s and 2020s.
9.8 The use of quotations across decades
While analysing moves and steps, some aspects peculiar of media discourse and press
releases in particular were identified, such as the use of quotations (Jacobs 1999a, 1999b, Sleurs et
al. 2003), and narrative (Bell 1991), also mentioned in chapter 5 of the present thesis. It could be
objected that both features belong to the textual sphere rather than generic structure; thus, they recur
only in certain EPA moves, i.e. in the descriptive and central ones, so it made sense to deal with
them in the context of the structural analysis.
Quotations are very common in press releases and can be explained in terms of what Jacobs
(1999a) calls ‘self-reference’, a typical feature of the genre, in its contemporary expression, already
discussed in chapter 5 of this dissertation. It will be however useful to remember that self-quotation
serves to make press releases look neutral and reliable, because it anticipates the objectivity
requirements of news reporting and lend an air of reliability to the content (Jacobs 1999a: 195–196).
With regard to the specific case of EPAs, quotations can emphasize the announcement (move 1) and
the presentation (move 2) of the exhibition incorporating the words of a principal or an
‘institutional’ voice: a curator, a director, or another expert involved. Generally, these comments are
functional to description and very positive in terms of evaluation. A further kind of quotation
extremely relevant for the genre of EPAs is that provided by artists statements, be they living or
dead, offering their point of view on the topic featured by the exhibition or explaining their work in
their own, unique words.
Corpus evidence shows that quotations are a recent breakthrough and have been gradually
introduced in the structure of EPAs. The EPA Diacorpus was manually explored in this regard and
the number of quotations across decades, distinguished between the British and the American
sections, was identified; moreover, the different voices behind quotations were taken into
211
consideration: as before mentioned, there can be artists, curators, museum directors, but also
collectors, loaners and sponsors delivering their message. The following table (9.10) shows findings
related to the quantitative presence of quotations in the corpus and distinguishes between British
and American cases.
British EPAs American EPAs Total %
1950 1 9 10 17
1960 5 18 23 37
1970 6 23 29 44
1980 6 15 21 34
1990 15 24 39 62
2000 18 30 48 73
Tab. 9.10 – Number of EPAs containing quotations across decades and countries
Tab. 9.10 shows that while in the 1950s only a 20% of EPAs shows the use of quotations, by
the 2000s this has grown almost to 80%. As already pointed out in the pilot study (see section
7.1.2), American EPAs show a more confident and appropriate use of quotations since the very
beginning of the genre, while until the 1990’s decade the presence of quotations is very limited
among British documents. Only one instance was found in the 1950s and is not to be attributed to a
curator or a director, nor even to an artist, but to the Chancellor of the British Parliament, who
announces the purchase of a picture to be retained at the National Gallery (25):
(25)
THE NATIONAL GALLERY'S NEW POUSSIN EXHIBITED
The National Gallery has now placed on exhibition Nicolas Poussin's "Adoration of the Shepherds", of which
the purchase was announced by Mr. Thorneycroft as Chancellor of the Exchequer on December 20th. Mr.
Thorneycroft stated in the House of Commons: "The Reviewing Committee on the Export of Works of Art
considered an application for a licence to export Poussin's 'Adoration of the Shepherds' in 1956. The
Com mittee decided that the picture ought to be retained in this country and on their recommendation I agreed
that a special grant of £12,000 should be made to the National Gallery toward the cost of purchase. The
acq uisition, at a price of £33,100, to which the National Art Collections Fund have contributed £3,000, has
now been completed, and the amount of the grant has been advanced from the Civil Contingencies Fund."
[… ]
(Lo ndon, National Gallery, New Poussin, 27 February 1958)
212
As shown by the extract (25), the quotation is here functional to justifying the exhibition –
and therefore its announcement to the press – in very concrete terms. It also delivers detailed
information on the price of the picture and the grant provided by the government. Surely in this case
the quotation does not fit the need to reinforce description or convey evaluation, as it normally does
in contemporary EPAs. Yet, it has a good potential in terms of newsworthiness, because it
establishes a solid ground to justify the purchase of the art work to the public.
Conversely, American EPA writers seem to be aware of the importance of quotations as a
means for reinforcing the value of an exhibition already in the 1950s, as the following extract shows
(26):
(26)
[…] Andrew C. Ritchie, Director of the Department of Painting and Sculpture, has organized the exhibition
and has written the accompanying book on Mr. Watkins […]. Never prolific, Watkins' few early works
produced in spare time from his job showed the influence now of Eakins, whom he greatly admired; now of
Cezanne, Gauguin and Picasso. Later, the characteristics of his mature painting, according to Andrew Ritchie,
were : "The strong emphasis on diagonals..., the large sweeping rhythms, the easy command of forms in space,
the expressionistic distortions of exaggerations of feature or gesture, the humorous mood... and the romantic
implications and its suffering”. […]
(New York, Museum of Modern Art, Franklin C. Watkins, 14 March 1950)
The evaluative statement here reproduced (26) provides a key in the interpretation of art
works on display, enhancing the description, and is perceived by readers as very authoritative,
because it comes from the curator of the exhibition, an expert in the relevant field.
The following table (tab. 9.11) gives evidence of the different voices quoted by EPA writers:
quantitatively speaking, the most relevant is that of curators, with almost 80 quotations identified
across decades and an increasing frequency from the 1950s to the 2000s (from 2 to 24 cases).
Almost represented at the same level are artists and directors, with respectively 50 and 43 identified
quotations across decades and a more accentuated presence in the 1990s decade; also starting from
the 1990s a new voice emerges, that of sponsors: this result does not come as a surprise, but
confirms what has been already pointed out with regard to the predominant role played by sponsors
from the 1990s onward, also reflected by language and structure of EPAs.
213
curators artists directors sponsors
1950 2 3 3
1960 5 7 8
1970 10 8 8
1980 15 8 6
1990 23 12 12 6
2000 24 12 6 6
TOT 79 50 43 12
Tab. 9.11 – Number of quotations distinguished by authors
The following extracts provide relevant examples of quotations attributed to artists. In the
first case (27), the artist’s voice is embedded in the central section of the exhibition and adds value
to the characterization of Jean Dubuffet as a peculiar artist, gaining inspiration from unorthodox
sources.
(27)
[…] In his "Anti-Cultural Position" speech of 1951, Dubuffet further expressed his rejection of certain
premises of Occidental culture and his preference for the spiritual attitudes of primitive peoples. He also
acknowledged "a great interest in madness. I am convinced that art has much to do with madness and
aberrations, " he said. […]
(New York, Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum, Jean Dubuffet, 19 April 1973)
In extract (28) the artist’s voice gains even more relevance, being reported in the beginning
of the EPA in the form of an epigraph. The quoted artist in this case (Marcel Duchamp) does not
coincide with the artist featured by the exhibition (Jean Arp); thus, the text contains a word play that
sticks in the memory of readers and also justifies the exhibition title, ‘Art is Arp’.
(28)
JEAN ARP'S ELEGANT AND BIOMORPHIC ABSTRACTIONS EXAMINED IN FOCUSED
EXHIBITION
"F or Arp, art is Arp" - Marcel Duchamp
Jean Arp, poet, painter, sculptor, and printmaker, was a founding member of the Dada movement, frequently
exhibited with the Surrealists. […]
(New York, Museum of Modern Art, Jean Arp, 1 March 2000)
214
9.9 The use of narrative sections across decades
As pointed out in chapter 5 of the present thesis (sub-section 5.1.2), not only quotations, but
also stories are among journalists’ most wanted items, especially if they are exciting, controversial
and novel. It is with good reason that Bell (1991: 100) stressed that “journalists do not write
articles. They write stories”. In order to create the news, press release writers may combine
narrative with linguistic means of emotional appeal, which are also related to the notion of
newsworthiness (Bell 1991).
The analysis of EPAs revealed a significant increase, especially from the 1970s onward, of
narrative sections, often combined with emotional language, in the descriptive parts of the text.
The presence of narrative and emotionally charged words can be related to the notion of
newsworthiness (Bell 1991): these features are used indeed to create ‘news value’ and excite
curiosity around the artists and their artworks. EPA writers can ‘create the news’ and move the
interest of the readers giving particular evidence, for instance, to the most captivating details of the
biography of the artist, or telling a story about a single work on view. Journalists seek stories that
are exciting, controversial and novel; EPA writers have to provide them in order to pursue a media
coverage.
The narrative potential of EPAs can be explored bearing in mind the analysis carried out by
Toolan (1988) on the basic components of the narrative – events, setting and character – and
looking for markers of affect (Martin / White 2005) that are felt to play a role in highlighting the
news story potential of EPAs, and therefore likely elements of narrative of complication, instability,
suspense or resolution.
The following extracts (29, 30) show how narrative and emotional language can be
combined in EPAs:
(29)
[…] During these same years Rossetti had moved to a house in Cheyne Walk in Chelsea. A large and brilliant group
of friends met there - Ruskin, Swinburne, Morris, Whistler and Burne-Jones among them, and along with the
amazing menagerie of wombats, kangaroos and armadilloes that were kept there, they proved an irresistibly
fascinating target for Rossetti's contemporaries. […] However from 1870 onwards it slowly began to break up under
the pressure of Rossetti's worsening physical and mental health which turned him into a recluse. […] It seems that
Rossetti's growing feelings of remorse over Elizabeth Siddal's death became identified in his mind with that
hopeless grief which Dante felt after the death of his Beatrice.
(London, Royal Academy of Art, Dante Gabriel Rossetti, 1 January 1972)
215
(30)
[…] I n World War II, as a combat pilot in the German Air Force, Beuys was seriously injured several times. After a
near-fatal plane crash during a snowstorm on the Russian Front, he was found by Crimean Tartars who saved his
life by wrapping him in a thick insulation of fat and felt. […] He had never fully recovered from his shattering war
experience and withdrew into a state of depression that lasted throughout the 50s. Beuys emerged from this period
of cri sis with new convictions which led him to testify against Nazism. […]
(New York, Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum, Joseph Beuys, 1 November 1979)
In both extracts (29, 30) the biography of the artist featured by the exhibition – Dante
Gabriel Rossetti in extract (29) and Joseph Beuys in extract (30) – is told in a narrative way,
developing a story that comprises all basic components of narrative according to Toolan (1988):
character, settings, and events. Main characters are obviously the artists, the settings are
respectively the Pre-Raphaelite circle and the Russian front during World War II, while the
described events are the death of Elizabeth Siddal, followed by a mental illness for Dante Gabriel
Rossetti, the plane crash and the subsequent rescue for Joseph Beuys.
Both extracts also provide elements of evaluative language – a large and brilliant group of
friends, the amazing menagerie, hopeless grief, near-fatal plane crash, shattering war experience -,
which add color to the story by creating an atmosphere of potential narrative complication within an
exceptional and unusual background. Evaluative items often belong to the semantic dimension of
emotions, also identified by Martin and White (2005) as the attitude of affect and "concerned with
registering positive and negative feelings" (2005: 42). For instance, in extract (10), the choice of the
noun recluse to address the miserable condition of Dante Gabriel Rossetti after his wife’s death is
particularly effective in terms of evaluation and triggers a series of associations related to
psychological disorders and social withdrawal. At the same way, the expression shattering war
experience is able to evoke the psychological scars left by the war on Joseph Beuys, appealing
readers emotionally and leaving them space for imagination.
The presence of narrative and emotional linguistic items that can be traced back to the aim
of ‘creating the news’ in the EPA Diacorpus could not be quantified with corpus-based
methodologies: a manual inspection of the corpus was, therefore, the only possible option. The
observation suggests that narrative sections become quantitatively relevant starting from the 70s and
that they fall within the communicative purpose of move 2 – presenting the exhibition – and in
particular of step 2.3 – description of artworks on display – and step 2.4 – biography of the featured
artist/s.
The following tables (tab. 9.12 and tab. 9.13) summarize the results of the analysis focused
on narrative sections.
216
British EPAs American EPAs Tot. %
1950 0 2 2 3
1960 1 1 2 3
1970 2 7 9 14
1980 8 7 15 25
1990 7 9 16 25
2000 8 7 15 23
TOT 26 33 59 16
Tab. 9.12 – Number of EPAs containing narrative sections across decades and countries
Step 2.3 description of artworks Step 2.4 biography
on display of the featured artist/s
1950 0 2
1960 1 1
1970 0 9
1980 3 12
1990 3 13
2000 1 14
TOT 8 51
Tab. 9.13 – Relevant context of narrative sections across decades
While during the 1950s and the 1960s the presence of narrative sections is rather irrelevant,
in view of the exiguous number of identified cases (about 3% of the total EPAs for each decade),
the 1970s decade marks a turning point: namely, narrative sections go from 2 overall cases in the
1950s to 9 overall cases in the 1970s and the percentage rises to 14%. The increasing trend
continues in the following decade, with 15 overall cases in the 1980s (25%), while the number of
EPAs containing narrative sections remains stable in the 1990s (16 cases) and in the 2000s (15
cases). It is to be noted that American writers initially show a more confident use of narrative (7
American cases in the 1970s against 2 British cases in the same decade), but British EPAs get even
in the subsequent decades and from then on no significant difference can be highlighted between
the two in this respect. As for the relevant context where narrative sections could be identified, the
most part of the cases (51 out of 59) were found to be functional to the narration of the biography of
artists (step 2.4), while only a minor part (8 out of 59) involved the story of art works on display
(step 2.3).
217
9.10 Discussion and concluding remarks
The analysis on structural change of EPAs over time sets out a series of final considerations.
As a general premise, it has to be pointed out that the methodologies adopted proved useful,
although they have been mainly based on manual observation. Moreover, despite its limited
dimensions, the sample of EPAs selected for investigation allowed to indentify major developments
and general trends in the period taken into account. Nonetheless, some specific parts of the analysis
required a wider perspective and necessarily involved an examination of the EPA Diacorpus in its
entirety: the identification of quotations and narrative sections, for instance, could not be limited to
the sample, because the presence of these features is irregularly distributed among EPAs, and the
analysis of a few examples would bias findings or minimize the relevance they have for the genre.
The first result to be gathered from the structural analysis is that of a general enhancement
of the genre from its earlier instances, dated to the 1950s, to the current shape shown by EPAs
issued in the 2000s. Also the pilot study led to the same conclusion, but this claim had to
substantiated by an observation of the structure in the intermediate decades. A conclusive table (tab.
9.14), summarizing the evolution of moves across decades can be useful to illustrate this gradual
development. Once again, colours can help to identify obligatory, core and optional components of
the structure, to be highlighted respectively in yellow, green and lilac. As a reminder, to be referred
to as obligatory, a move must appear at least in 90% of the cases; core moves are those reported
between 50% and 90% of the cases, while optional are those under 50% of frequency.
Move 1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000
ANNOUNCING
1 THE EXHIBITION obligatory obligatory obligatory obligatory obligatory obligatory
PRESENTING THE
2 EXHIBITION obligatory obligatory obligatory obligatory obligatory obligatory
ESTABLISHING
CREDENTIALS
FOR THE
3 EXHIBITION optional core core core obligatory obligatory
PROVIDING
INFORMATION
4 FOR VISITORS optional optional core obligatory obligatory obligatory
SOLICITING
5 PRESS RESPONSE core obligatory obligatory obligatory obligatory obligatory
Tab. 9.14 – Evolution of moves across decades according to their frequency
218
The graphic representation shows that almost each decade brought new achievements in the
structure of EPAs, namely:
- in the 1950s two moves out of five are obligatory, one is core and two are optional;
- in the 1960s three moves out of five are obligatory, one is core and one is optional;
- in the 1970s three moves out of five are obligatory and two are core;
- in the 1980s four moves out of five are obligatory and one is core;
- in the 1990s and in the 2000s five moves out of five are obligatory.
Already from the earlier stages, EPAs are characterized by move 1 and move 2, while move 3, 4
and 5 are a subsequent breakthrough: move 5 is definitely acquired in the 1960s, move 4 in the
1980s and move 3 in the 1990s. We may therefore point out that EPAs were born with a vocation
for announcing and describing the exhibition, but only later they have acquired a clear awareness of
being press releases, i.e. texts explicitly meant for journalists; even later they have matured into
effective tools of communication between museums and their audiences, comprising visitors and
sponsors among their relevant interlocutors.
Table 9.14 also shows that some contiguous decades share a certain grade of similarity, since no
relevant change – or no change at all – intervenes between them, to the point that they could
overlap. Two periods, in particular, could be united and taken into account as a whole: from 1960 to
1979 and from 1990 to 2009. Major structural change seems to be concentrated right before these
periods, namely between the 1950s and the 1960s and between the 1980s and the 1990s, while the
1970’s and 2000’s decades appear as periods of consolidation and stability. This confirms a
previous suggestion derived from the analysis (see section 9.7) and namely that major change
occurs every thirty years in the structure of EPAs.
The analysis highlights therefore two turning points that are decisive in terms of structural
change, whose effects are shown in the following related periods: (1) 1950 – 1979 and (2) 1980 –
2009.
The most salient changes related to the period comprised between 1950 and 1979 concern
move 1, 2 and 5. On one hand, there is major emphasis on creativity, both in the announcement and
in the description of the exhibition, as suggested by the marked use of captivating exhibition titles,
narrative sections and linguistic means of emotional appeal. On the other, from this period onwards
EPAs acquire a more definite shape and are modelled on the real needs of media people: they do not
only suggest a publishing date, but, more importantly, a contact for further information is provided,
along with a date for the press preview and the indication of photographs available if needed.
219
Moreover, EPA writers acquire an increasing awareness of what journalists most want: novel stories
to be told and authoritative statements to be reported even verbatim. The marked use of narrative
sections and quotations is indeed functional to these aims.
These relevant developments in the structure of EPAs can be put in relation with cultural
changes that took place in the same period in museum professional settings: as pointed out in the
first chapter of the thesis, after World War II public relations have been gradually and successfully
introduced also in these institutions. Professional press officers were being appointed for the first
time and effective communication was now perceived as a value also by non-profit organizations.
Moreover, the spread of advertising was igniting creativity in professional discourses with relevant
consequences in terms of appropriation of lexical and rhetorical resources (Bhatia 2004). We might
expect that also EPAs, and museum public relations in general, were influenced by the innovative
character and creative use of language typical of advertising.
In the period comprised between 1980 and 2009 major changes concern moves 3 and 4. An
increasing need for self-reference can be noted, realized through a detailed mention of the
exhibition credits and, mostly, an accurate account of the people who made possible the event,
quoting one of the most recurrent phrases in the EPAs of that period. Significantly, curators are not
necessarily the most prominent figures behind the exhibition, because sponsors compete with them
for attention and, if we look at the frequency of relative steps (3.2 and 3.3), corpus evidence shows
that their mention can even outnumber that of curators. In this period the structure of EPAs also
reflect the complete acknowledgement of the role played by visitors in determining the success of
an exhibition. They are therefore provided not only with more detailed information on opening
hours and admission, but, according to their status of students, seniors, members, etc., are involved
in new collateral activities related to the exhibition and organized ad hoc, such as lectures, films,
special events, guided tours.
Also for this period, as for the previous one, cultural change related to the specific field of
museum settings may be invoked to explain the structural development of EPAs. As pointed out in
the first chapter of the thesis (section 1.1), in the 1980s the contribution of public funds to museums
remained static or drastically fell, so that financial concerns have emerged. Museums’ governing
bodies and directors have had to seek funding from alternative sources: annual memberships and
visitor fees have been introduced (Alexander 1999). This explains the more relevant role gained by
sponsors within the structure of EPAs, but also the introduction of collateral events addressed to
visitors, functional both as educational and marketing tools. The mention of the catalogue – an item
to be sold at museum bookshops – is also obligatory or core in this period: another sign of the shift
220
toward a more marketed-oriented idea of exhibition. Thus, the attention towards visitors has also to
be contextualized into a new, positive situation concerning museums: for most of the twentieth
century they had been academic enclaves, the domain of curators and art historians, but they were
closed on weekends or holidays, today the most popular days to visit museums and other tourist
attractions (McLean 1993). From the 1980s American and British museums experienced broader
cultural changes, which led to the idea of museum as we know it: a live place, open to people of all
ages.
A great cultural change related to the period comprised between 1980 and 2009 is the advent
of the Internet, which seemingly did not compromise the already consolidated structure of EPAs,
but rather revolutionized the way they are sent and used, as pointed out in chapter 1 (section 1.1)
and 5 (section 5.2). This major change concerns press releases in general and there is evidence in
particular that e-dimension – i.e. publication on websites – has been changing their use and
language, justifying the shift towards a more promotional tone in comparison with traditional paper
press releases (Strobbe /Jacobs 2005). It can be pointed out that, in terms of structure, the advent of
Internet has allowed EPA writers to focus on a more refined selection of contents and, for instance,
to avoid basic and technical information, should this be available on the website. However, e-
dimension did not imply a textual contraction, as data on the length of EPAs show (see chapter 6).
To conclude these final remarks on structural change of EPAs between 1950 and 2009, we
could summarize the two-phases evolution of the genre through a simple-minded, but still effective
statement: from 1950 to 1979 EPAs get ‘dressed-up’, in the sense that they acquire a more defined
shape, leaning towards creativity, media standards and quality writing, while from 1980 to 2009
they get promotional, trying to enlarge audiences and incorporate new interlocutors. These aspects
are not mutually exclusive or contradictory, but rather compatible and tend to reinforce each other
over time. The final result of this combination is indeed a very stable and recursive ultimate
structure for EPAs.
221
10. Conclusions
The primary aim of the present study was to describe the diachronic evolution of a textual
genre used in museum settings – exhibition press announcements (EPAs) – from 1950 to 2009, i.e.
from earlier instances to present uses. Two questions in particular were under scrutiny: the
evolution – or maybe we should say the survival – of the genre in view of the advent of new public
relations practices already adopted by museums, such as social media, community relations and
web communication, and the origin and reasons of its strong promotional features, which have only
been investigated from a synchronic perspective so far (Lazzeretti 2010; Lazzeretti/Bondi 2012).
The study is based on a corpus of 378 EPAs, the EPA Diacorpus, comprising almost
300,000 words, issued by American and British high-profile museums: the London National
Gallery, the London Victoria&Albert Museum, the London Royal Academy of Arts, the New York
Museum of Modern Art, the New York Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum, the Los Angeles J. Paul
Getty Museum, the New York Frick Collection and the Chicago Museum of Contemporary Art.
To make a systematic diachronic study possible, EPAs were chosen to represent periods at
ten-year intervals. The methods used combined a quantitative or statistical approach with a
qualitative and analytical one: statistical tools were applied to compare the frequencies of the
features chosen for investigation across decades, while, for an interpretation of the results arrived at,
a qualitative perspective was necessary. Moreover, a qualitative analysis was essential when
looking at the evolution of the generic structure of EPAs over time and, in particular, at the use of
narrative sections, quotations, linguistic means of evaluation and emotional appeal.
After preparing the groundwork for the study, introducing the relevant methodologies –
corpus linguistics, genre analysis and discourse analysis – in chapters 2 to 5, the design of the
corpus and methods applied in the analysis were described in chapters 6 and 7. In chapters 8 and 9
the main analysis was carried out and the EPA Diacorpus was explored respectively with regard to
the diachronic lexical and structural variation. In the following sections (10.1 to 10.3) a synthesis of
the final results and a general interpretation of them will be provided.
10.1 Synthesis of results of lexical analysis
While previous diachronic studies applied to media discourse argue for an increasingly more
conversational and informal style (see Hundt / Mair 1999, Partington 2010, 2012, Westin 2002) or
even for a shift towards a vague style of writing (Duguid 2010), corpus evidence shows that EPAs
222
have kept a formal style, in view of the absence of contractions, the decrease of the intensifier so
and the general increase of lexical variety over time, given by the values of STTR, which went from
42.35 in the 1950s to 44.8 in the 2000s ( +2.45 points). Also, an increasing urge for a conventional
lexis can be stressed, quite a sort of technical jargon, which aims at making recognizable the genre
of EPAs to its users. Ambiguous expressions, such as, for instance, the phrase one-man show or the
verb form exhibited were gradually discarded by EPA writers, who later preferred more technical
and ‘safe’ expressions such as retrospective and displayed or on display, while the phrase visual
arts gradually replaced fine arts. In this respect, our analysis confirmed Renouf’s (2007b: 23)
statement that “not all words are equally destined for success”, as their fortunes may be inhibited by
several factors and especially by ambiguity. Moreover, in her diachronic study on 20th century
newspaper editorials, also Westin (2002) highlighted a trend towards a more precise lexical choice,
so that we could argue for a common point in the evolution of EPAs and newspaper editorials:
namely, for an increasing need for specificity, or, to put it in a simple way, for calling things with
their proper names.
A striking element emerged from the analysis of lexical variation is that evaluative
language has always characterised EPAs since their very first origin, which can be roughly dated to
the post-war period, as pointed out in our historical excursus on the genre in chapter 1. EPAs issued
in the 1950s decade, which is the first period covered by the EPA Diacorpus, already provide
evidence of evaluative adjectives and phrases typical of the genre in its contemporary shape
(Lazzeretti/Bondi 2012). More stunningly, some evaluative features are not only present already in
the 1950s, but are also stable in their frequencies across the decades: this is the case of evaluative
adjectives such as great, known, first and of related phrase for the first time, used to stress the aspect
of quality and novelty of the exhibition. Of course, EPA writers have become more conscious of the
potential conveyed by the language of evaluation over time and have exploited it more creatively in
the 1990s and 2000s, while evaluative patterns used in the 1950s seem to be more predictable and
repetitive. However, this result was quite unexpected and leads us to conclude that EPAs were born
with evaluation in their DNA. It also highlights the importance of adopting an historical
perspective in genre analysis, because, before carrying out a diachronic analysis, one could have
easily presumed that the use of evaluative language of EPAs was a consequence of contemporary
practices, increasing promotional purposes and marketing strategies. Our analysis highlighted a
different, more complex scenario, which encourages further research in this direction.
Along with evaluation, another consistent feature of EPAs is that of description, confirmed
by the stable frequency of the determiner which, introducing a specification of what the writer
wishes to explain, evaluate or describe more in detail, and the auxiliary verb form are, often used to
223
describe art works currently on display. Nonetheless, the decrease of descriptive verbs implying a
sort of mediation between the writer and the reader – shown and shows – let us hypothesize an
increasing preference for a more vivid and straightforward style of description: in other words,
instead of describing what a picture shows, contemporary EPA writers prefer to tell directly how it
looks.
The analysis of diachronic lexical variation has also revealed some innovations in the way
exhibitions are set up and artists are selected by museum professionals.
With regard to exhibition design, corpus evidence suggests a trend towards
comprehensiveness rather than selectiveness. Large exhibits are preferred to narrowly focused
events, while increasing care has been taken in evaluating and choosing artists, preferably avoiding
the risk to present new and emerging names. In addition, the taste of visitors changes fast and
museums have to deal with these fluctuations. Our analysis revealed that from 1950 onwards new
media have emerged in the visual arts, but they did not seriously challenged classic subjects and
topics of exhibitions.
A significant phenomenon reflected by lexical variation of EPAs is the shift from one-item
to multi-item exhibitions: the decline of the word picture in its singular form rather than its plural,
typically pre-modified by a determiner (the, this), in parallel to the increase of many other plural
nouns identifying art works to put on display (images, works, objects) leads us to that conclusion.
Moreover, something has changed in the way artists are selected for exhibiting: they do not have to
be famous – another declining word –, nor particularly great or known, since these adjectives are
preferably used to refer to their work, but they definitely must have an acknowledged career.
Indeed, young artists have fewer advantages in the art scene, as reflected by the corpus, where less
than 30 occurrences can be ascribed to the semantic field of youth.
Art subjects may change, and portraits – an increasing item within the EPA Diacorpus –
may be more intriguing for our times, but a landscape is still a must for any exhibition, as well as
drawings and paintings – to mention some lockwords of the corpus, i.e. words stable in their
frequencies across decades – especially if the latter are combined in order to enrich the educational
experience of visitors, as well as to increase the number of art works on display with a close eye on
costs.
New media have emerged over time: corpus evidence shows the rise of photography and the
decline of architecture; however, the art of painting and drawing have not gone out of style, as
words belonging to both lemmas, PAINT and DRAW, show a stable pattern across decades.
Some further remarks concern the traces left by macro-level events on the language of
EPAs, such as financial crises, globalization, and the advent of new technologies (see Garzone et al.
224
2012). Corpus evidence confirms the emergence of economic concerns in museums from the 1980s
onward, as reflected by the increase of some revealing lexical items, pointing to the need to find
alternative financial resources in view of cuts in public funding: the increasing frequency of words
like admission, tickets and students, for instance, is reflective of the introduction of visitor fees, but
also of the need to differentiate them for some segments of audiences, i.e students, according to
their age and other characteristics. Similarly, the rise of education programmes and collateral events
thematically linked to the exhibition, such as lectures, films, artist talks, guided tours, has to be put
in relation to marketing strategies aiming at widening the number of potential visitors. Another
increasing word is catalogue, identifying an item on sale in bookshops, from which museums can
profit. To confirm the financial difficulties faced by museums is also the decline of the verb
acquire, possibly related to a strict reduction of museum budgets devoted to new acquisitions of
artworks. Eventually, a peak in the occurrences of the phrase made possible by, typically
introducing the mention of exhibition sponsors, has to be noted in the 1980s, when museums began
to establish commercial partnerships on a regular basis.
In the last decades globalization has changed the world by increasing relations between
countries: one of its effects among museums, reflected by the EPA Diacorpus, is the increasing
frequency of the noun tour in contrast to the decrease of country, being the former related to the
feasibility of travelling an exhibition (Lord/Lord 2002) and the latter to small-scale exhibitions,
organised at a national level.
Last decades of the twentieth century were not only associated with financial hardship for
museums: the EPA Diacorpus reflects the advent of new web technologies through the sudden
appearance at the end of the nineties of acronyms used for identifying web pages: www – acronym
for World Wide Web -, org – a domain extension used for non-profit organization, museums
included, and uk, a national domain extension. Yet, the advent of the Internet did not heavily affect
the genre of EPAs, as it will be argued in the following sub-section (10.2), but rather revolutionized
the way they are sent and used (see chapter 1, section 1.1, and 5, section 5.2).
10.2 Synthesis of results of structural analysis
With regard to the evolution of the generic structure of EPAs, our analysis highlighted a
general enhancement of the genre from its earlier instances, dated to the 1950s, to the current shape
shown by EPAs issued in the 2000s.
EPAs evolved from an irregular three-move structure in the 1950s to a consistent and recursive
five-move structure in the 1990s and 2000s. Earlier texts provide a prototypical structure comprised
225
of three main moves: a brief announcement of the exhibition, an explanatory section on the topic,
and some pieces of information specific for the press members, soliciting further contact, although
in a very implicit way. Starting from the 1980s two promotional moves emerge: one establishing
credentials for the exhibition by stating its credits, such as organization, curatorship and
sponsorship, and one providing technical information for visitors (opening hours, free or charged
admission, how to buy tickets, collateral events, etc...). We may therefore point out that EPAs were
born with a vocation for announcing and describing the exhibition, but only later acquired a clear
awareness of being press releases, i.e. texts meant for journalists; even later they have become
effective tools of communication between museums and their audiences, comprising visitors and
sponsors among their relevant interlocutors.
Our analysis highlights two turning points decisive in terms of structural change, between the
1950s and the 1960s and between the 1980s and the 1990s, leading us to guess that major change
occurs every thirty years in the structure of EPAs. We summarized this two-phases evolution in a
sort of slogan: first EPAs get dressed-up, then they get promotional.
In fact, the first period is marked by an emphasis on creativity, both in the announcement and in
the description of the exhibition, as suggested by the use of captivating exhibition titles, narrative
sections and linguistic means of emotional appeal. Moreover, from this period onwards EPAs
acquire a more definite shape and are modelled on the real needs of media people: they do not only
suggest a publishing date, but, more importantly, a contact for further information is provided,
along with a date for the press preview and the indication of photographs available if needed.
Furthermore, EPA writers acquire an increasing awareness of what journalists most want: novel
stories to be told and authoritative statements to be reported even verbatim. The marked use of
narrative sections and quotations is indeed functional to these aims.
These relevant developments in the structure of EPAs can be put in relation with cultural
changes that took place in the same period in museum professional settings: as pointed out in the
first chapter of the thesis, after World War II public relations have been gradually and successfully
introduced also in these institutions. Professional press officers were being appointed for the first
time and effective communication was now perceived as a value also by non-profit organizations.
Moreover, the spread of advertising was igniting creativity in professional discourses with relevant
consequences in terms of appropriation of lexical and rhetorical resources (Bhatia 2004). We might
expect that also EPAs, and museum public relations in general, were influenced by the innovative
character and creative language of advertising.
226
After the second turning point, from the 1980s onwards, an increasing need for self-
reference can be noted, realized through a detailed mention of the exhibition credits and, mostly, an
accurate account of the people who made possible the event, quoting one of the most recurrent
phrases in the EPAs of that period. Significantly, curators are not necessarily the most prominent
figures behind the exhibition, because sponsors compete with them for attention and their mention
can even outnumber that of curators. In this period the structure of EPAs also reflect the complete
acknowledgement of the role played by visitors in determining the success of an exhibition. They
are therefore provided not only with more detailed information on opening hours and admission,
but, according to their status of students, seniors, members, etc., are involved in new collateral
activities related to the exhibition and organized ad hoc, such as lectures, films, special events,
guided tours.
Also for this period, as for the previous one, cultural change related to the specific field of
museum settings may be invoked to explain the structural development of EPAs. As pointed out in
the first chapter of the thesis (section 1.1), in the 1980s the contribution of public funds to museums
remained static or drastically fell, so that financial concerns have emerged. Museums’ governing
bodies and directors have had to seek funding from alternative sources: annual memberships and
visitor fees have been introduced (Alexander 1999). This explains the more relevant role gained by
sponsors within the structure of EPAs, but also the introduction of collateral events addressed to
visitors, functional both as educational and marketing tools. Thus, the attention towards visitors has
also to be contextualized into a new, positive situation concerning museums: for most of the
twentieth century they had been academic enclaves, the domain of curators and art historians, but
they were closed on weekends or holidays, today the most popular days to visit museums (McLean
1993). From the 1980s American and British museums experienced broader cultural changes, which
led to the idea of museum as we know it: a live place, open to people of all ages.
A groundbreaking event related to the period comprised between 1980 and 2009 is the
advent of the Internet, which however did not compromise the generic structure of EPAs, already
consolidated by then. The World Wide Web rather revolutionized the way EPAs are sent and used,
as pointed out in chapter 1 (section 1.1) and 5 (section 5.2). This major change concerns press
releases in general and implies that, once they have been published on websites, journalistic
intervention, also known as “gatekeeping”, can be completely bypassed in reaching audiences.
There is evidence that the e-dimension – i.e. publication on websites – has been changing
use and language of press releases, justifying the shift towards a more promotional tone in
comparison with traditional paper press releases (Strobbe / Jacobs 2005). Since evaluative language
227
is already attested in 1950s EPAs and seems to be a constant of the genre (see section 10.1), we
cannot claim that the e-dimension is the main and first responsible of promotionality in EPAs. More
research would be needed in order to explain the inner vocation to positive evaluation of artworks,
artists and exhibitions characterising EPAs, which maybe could be ascribed to art discourse in
general. However, the fact that from the 1990s onward EPAs are also placed on the Web, where
media people can access them selectively, wherever and whenever they need them, without even
calling the museum, has undoubtedly ignited a great competition among writers, determining an
increasing creative effort among writers, who strive for attention, press coverage and good reviews.
Moreover, the advent of Internet did not imply a textual contraction or a more refined
selection of contents for EPAs. On the contrary, as shown by data on the corpus size reported in
chapter 7, EPAs have become longer, more syntactically developed and lexically richer over time.
Their length has more than doubled, from about 40 thousand tokens in the 1950s to more than 80
thousand tokens in the 2000s, so as the number of words used in each sentence (+ 3.44) and the
lexical variety, measured by the STTR ( +2.45), have increased. In view of our analysis of
diachronic structural variation, which highlighted the shift from a three-move to a five-move
structure, an expansion in terms of length does not come as a surprise: obviously, writers had more
things to say and this required more words. Moreover, it has to be noted that generally EPAs can be
downloaded from websites in a ‘frozen’ format, (see Garzone 2012: 34-35), i.e. in *.doc or *.pdf.
These electronic formats reproduce the aspect of a printed – and therefore static – document, the
same that EPAs already had in the 1950s, when they were typewritten. As a consequence, EPA
writers do not have to keep the content short to fit the screen but are free to write as long as they
need. The fixed layout also minimizes the effects of multimodality, hypertextuality and
interactivity, typical features of web pages, on EPAs, living their second life on the web as separate,
independent creatures.
10.3 Differences between the American and British sub-corpora
As the EPA Diacorpus is almost equally divided into two sub-sections, one comprising
American EPAs and one comprising British EPAs, the difference between the two in terms of
diachronic variation was a research question worthy of investigation.
In general terms, we may point out that only a few differences were highlighted; moreover,
the most relevant discrepancy is at a macro-level and concerns the way communication is conceived
by museum professionals. This result actually reinforces one of the methodological principle upon
228
which the EPA Diacorpus was built, that regarding the appropriateness of an hybrid corpus
comprising British and American EPAs (see chapter 6). Since the beginning of the study, in fact, we
have been arguing for the similarity of British and American EPAs, so that they can be studied
together in order to obtain a detailed picture of the genre.
As pointed out by McLean (2012: 42), “marketing was introduced to American museums at
roughly the same period as to UK museums […]. Nevertheless American museums have led the
field in adopting marketing techniques and innovating with marketing practice”. According to our
analysis, which reflected the primacy of the United States in the field of museum public relations,
this statement turns out particularly true.
Corpus evidence suggests that American museums have always placed great value on public
relations, to be seen as a part of a complex system of communication which involved the museum at
various levels: data show that an entire department – a word stable in its frequency across decades,
particularly relevant for the American section of the corpus – was entitled to public relations
already from the 1950s, while British museums appear more focused on press office activities,
which is only a part of the work associated to public relations, being the latter an increasing phrase
among British documents. However, the increasing frequency of the soliciting phrase please contact
in both sections of the corpus suggests that the relationship to the press has become more overt and
explicit over time and that this development involved both American and British museums.
A trend quantitatively more relevant in American EPAs concerns the role of museum
professionals, and in particular curators and (museum) directors. While the word curators shows a
pattern of clear increase over time, (museum) directors is characterised by a declining profile,
which suggests that their roles have intertwined over time, to the point that curators are the most
visible professional figure engaged in the organisation of American exhibitions, but also those
mostly exposed to the media and public judgement.
Both British and American museum press officers were still developing a standard generic
structure for EPAs in the 1950s, but American writers show more confidence in terms of self
promotion strategies and knowledge of press needs already in the earlier texts.
For instance, American EPAs are characterised by a more appropriate use of quotations
since the very beginning of the genre, while until the 1990’s decade the presence of quotations is
very limited among British documents. The same is to be noted with regard to the use of narrative
sections, already attested among American EPAs in the 1950s and to be introduced at least a decade
later in British EPAs.
229
10.4 Final considerations
Introducing this chapter, we summarized the research questions tackled by the present study
into two main points: the question of the survival of the genre of EPAs in view of the threat
represented by new forms of communication adopted by museums and the historical reasons behind
the strong promotional features characterizing contemporary EPAs.
As Bhatia (2004) pointed out, it is possible for a textual genre to change over a period of
time, or even to disappear: it can “further develop or even become obsolete because of lack of use”
(2004: 62). In the case of EPAs we are in front of an extraordinary development and a strong
consolidation over time: they went through a continuous enrichment of contents and a gradual
perfection of their structure, which implied an expansion in terms of lexical variety and length of
the texts, but also a shift form merely informative and descriptive to promotional purposes.
It has been also highlighted an increasing use of quotations, forms of narrative and linguistic
means of emotional appeal. Hence, despite the urge for conciseness which characterizes
contemporary public relations, as those based on Facebook and Twitter, EPAs have remained a tool
for an in-depth description and evaluation of the exhibition, where apparently analysis is preferred
to synthesis. Furthermore, EPAs have been increasingly perceived by their writers as a textual space
where creativity can be practiced and evaluative language can be used to create powerful and
emotional combinations of words and phrases.
Consequently, despite the advent of new media and new public relation practices, the genre
of EPAs seems far from decline. In view of our analysis, it seems not only able to survive to new
media but also to coexist side by side with them, in a sort of mutual interaction. The impression is
that, actually, new media can work as a bait for journalists and encourage them to download EPAs
from websites. Hence, in this specific context old genres and new genres could be mutually
interdependent and live in a sort of symbiotic balance. Of course, this idea should be verified
through an in-depth ethnographic analysis, which is an interesting future direction of research in
this field. For instance, the daily work of press officers could be observed at a close distance and the
interaction between posts published on social media and download of press releases from museum
websites could be investigated.
As for the reasons of promotionality in EPAs, the most relevant change-inducing factor is to
be identified in the increasing need of alternative funding faced by museums from the 1980s
onward, when governments cut down their financial support. This ignited a great change for
230
museums, which had to seek new commercial partners, improve public relations and widen the
audience. From that moment onward EPA writers tried to creatively exploit the genre in order to
arouse journalists’ interest and gain a better press coverage. Bearing in mind that “journalists do not
write articles, they write stories” (Bell 1991: 100) and that “strong positive statements can make the
release look more newsworthy” (Pander Maat 2007:63), our analysis showed that EPA writers
adopted an increasing, brilliant use of quotations, narrative sections and emotionally charged
language in order to meet the needs of media people and create the news.
We have already pointed out in section 10.1 that the language of EPAs was naturally leaning
towards positive evaluation of art works and artists already in the 1950s, when museum marketing
was merely developed; in the 1990s the advent of the Internet boosted this inner tendency, putting
EPAs on the edge of museum public relations, as they could be easily accessed and downloaded
from websites. This great change also determined a further shift towards creativity and
promotionality, which led to the current shape of EPAs as we know them.
Keeping the focus on promotional features, our analysis also revealed that sponsors have
been playing an increasing role in determining exhibiting choices and therefore in influencing
related texts as EPAs. It could be guessed that their presence goes beyond a mere mention within
the press release or a logo in the header of the sheet. However, their weight is difficult to measure
through corpus linguistics or genre analysis methodologies; hence, this could be a further research
question to be addressed by an ethnographic perspective.
To conclude, a final remark is to be made concerning the primary source of this study, the
EPA Diacorpus. Undoubtedly, its compilation has been worth carrying out, since the corpus reflects
the great social and cultural changes taking place over the last decades in museum settings: in
particular, the transition towards a more market-oriented concept of museum, innovations in the
way exhibitions are set up and artists are selected by museums, advent of new technologies.
Hopefully in the future it will be useful for practitioners, such as museum professionals and art
journalists, especially in terms of public relations education, allowing them to become aware of the
typical features of the genre and to discover how, why, and when these features were introduced.
231
References
Primary source
The EPA Diacorpus. Compiled by Cecilia Lazzeretti, Doctoral School in Human Sciences,
Department of Linguistic and Cultural Studies, University of Modena and Reggio Emilia.
For further information, see chapter 6 in the present thesis.
Secondary sources
Aaronson, Merry / Spetner, Don / Ames, Carol 1998. The Public Relations Writer’s Handbook. San Francisco, CA:
Jossey-Bass.
Adams, G. Donald 1983. Museum public relations. Nashville: American Association for State and Local History.
Alexander, Edward Porter / Alexander, Mary 2008. Museums in Motion: An Introduction to the History and Functions
of Museums. Lanham: Altamira Press.
Alexander, Victoria 1999. A delicate balance: museums and the market-place. Museum International, 51(2), 29-34.
Almeida, Eugenie P. 1992. A category system for the analysis of factuality in newspaper discourse. Text 12: 233-62
Archer, Dawn 2005. Historical Sociopragmatics: Questions and Answers in the English Courtroom (1640-1760).
Pragmatics and Beyond New Series. Amsterdam/Philadelphia: John Benjamins.
Archer, Dawn 2006a. (Re)initiating strategies: Judges and defendants in Early Modern English courtrooms. Journal of
Historical Pragmatics 7 (2): 181-211.
Askehave, Inger / Swales, John 2001. Genre identification and communicative purpose: A problem and a possible
solution. Applied Linguistics 22 (2): 195-212.
Askehave, Inger / Ellerup Nielsen, Anne 2004. Webmediated genres. A challenge to traditional genre theory. Working
paper no. 6. Aarhus: Center for Virksomhedskommunication.
Askehave, Inger / Ellerup Nielsen, Anne 2005. What are the Characteristics of Digital Genres? Genre Theory from a
Multi-modal Perspective. Information Technology & People. 18/2, 120-141.
Atkins, Robert 1990. Artspeak. New York: Abbeville Press Publisher
Axelsson, Margareta Westergren. 1998. Contractions in British newspapers in the late 20th century. Studia Anglistica
Upsaliensia 102. Uppsala: Acta Universitatis Upsaliensis.
Baker, Paul 2006. Using Corpora in Discourse Analysis. London: Continuum.
Baker, Paul 2010: Will Ms ever be as frequent as Mr? A corpus-based examination of gendered terms across four
diachronic corpora. Language and Gender 4 (1): 125–149.
Baker, Paul 2011. Times May Change, But We Will Always Have Money: Diachronic Variation in Recent British
English. Journal of English Linguistics 39 (1): 65-88.
Bal, Mieke 1997. Narratology. Introduction to the theory of narrative. University of Toronto Press: Toronto.
Barber, Charles L. 1962. Some measurable characteristics of modern scientific prose. Contributions to English syntax
and philology. Gothenburg Studies in English (14), 21-43. (Reprinted in Swales, John 1988. Episodes in ESP.
Hertfordshire: Prentice Hall, 1-16).
Bauer, Laurie 1994. Watching English Change. London / New York: Longman.
233
Bauer, Laurie 2002. Inferring Variation and Change from Public Corpora. In Chambers, John Kenneth / Trudgill, Peter /
Schilling-Estes, Natalie (eds) The Handbook of Language Variation and Change. Oxford: Blackwell, 97-114.
Baxandall, Michael 1991. The language of art criticism. In Kemal, Salim / Gaskell, Ivan (eds) The Language of Art
History. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 67 -75.
Bazerman, Charles 1994. Systems of genres and the enhancement of social intentions. In Freedman, Aviva / Medway,
Peter (eds.) Genre and the New Rhetoric. London: Taylor and Francis, 79-101.
Beacco, Jean-Claude 2012. À propos de la structuration des communautés discursives : beaux-arts et appréciatif . Les
Carnets du Cediscor.
Available: http://cediscor.revues.org/523
Last access: 23rd October, 2012.
Beal, Joan C. / Fitzmaurice, Susan / Hodson, Jane 2012 (eds.) Special issue: selected papers from the fourth
International Conference on Late Modern English. English Language and Linguistics 16.2: 201–207.
Beaugrande, Robert / Dressler, Wolfgang U. 1981. Introduction to text linguistics. London / New York: Longman.
Bednarek, Monika 2006. Evaluation in media discourse. Analysis of a newspaper corpus. London: Continuum.
Bell, Allan 1991. The Language of News Media. Oxford: Blackwell.
Berenson, Bernard 1948. Aesthetics and history in the visual arts. New York: Pantheon.
Berkenkotter, Carol / Huckin, Thomas N. 1995. Genre knowledge in disciplinary communication – cognition / culture /
power. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Berkenkotter, Carol 2008a. Genre evolution? The case for a diachronic perspective. In Bhatia, Vijay K. / Flowerdew,
John / Jones, Rodney H. (eds) Advances in Discourse Studies. London / New York: Routledge, 178-191.
Bhatia, Vijay K. 1993. Analysing Genre: Language Use in Professional Settings, London / New York: Longman.
Bhatia, Vijay K. 1995. Genre-mixing in professional communication: the case of. 'private intentions' v. 'socially
recognised purposes'. In Bruthiaux, Paul / Boswood, Tim / Du Babcock, Bertha (eds) Explorations in English for
Professional Communication. Hong Kong: City University of Hong Kong, 1-19.
Bhatia, Vijay K. 1997. Genre-Mixing in Academic Introductions. English for Specific Purposes, 16/3, 181-192.
Bhatia, Vijay K. 2004. Worlds of Written Discourse: A Genre-Based View. London: Continuum.
Bhatia, Vijay K. 2010. Interdiscursivity in professional communication. Discourse & Communication. 21/ 1: 32-50.
Biber, Douglas 2003. Compressed Noun-Phrase Structures in Newspaper Discourse. In Aitchison, Jean / Lewis, Diana
M. (eds) New Media Language. London / New York: Routledge, 169-181.
Biber, Douglas / Conrad, Susan / Reppen, Randi 1994. Corpus-based approaches to issues in applied linguistics.
Applied Linguistics 15(2), 169-189.
Biber, Douglas / Finegan, Edward / Atkinson, Dwight 1994. ARCHER and its challenges: Compiling and Exploring a
Representative Corpus of Historical English Registers. In: Fries, Udo / Schneider, Peter / Tottie, Gunnel (eds), Creating
and using English language corpora. Papers from the 14th International Conference on English Language Research on
Computerized Corpora, Zurich 1993. Amsterdam/Atlanta: Rodopi, 1-13.
Biber, Douglas / Finegan, Edward / Atkinson, Dwight / Beck, Ann / Burges, Dennis / Burges, Jene 1994. The design
and analysis of the ARCHER corpus: A progress report [A Representative Corpus of Historical English Registers]. In
Kytö, Merja / Rissanen, Matti / Wright, Susan (eds), Corpora across the centuries: Proceedings of the First
International Colloquium on English Diachronic Corpora, St Catharine's College Cambridge, 25-27 March 1993
(Language and Computers. Studies in Practical Linguistics 11). Amsterdam /Atlanta: Rodopi, 3-6.
234
Bizzell, Patricia 1992. Academic Discourse and Critical Consciousness. Pittsburg: University of Pittsburg Press.
Bloomfield, Morton W. / Newmark, Leonard 1963. A linguistic introduction to the history of English. New York:
Knopf.
Bondi, Marina 2009. Perspective and position in museum websites. In Radighieri, Sara / Tucker, Paul (eds) Point of
View. Description and Evaluation across Discourses. Rome: officina edizioni, 113-127.
Bondi, Marina 2013. ‘Historians as Recounters: Description across Genres’. In Gotti, Maurizio / Guinda, Carmen
Sancho (eds) Narratives in Academic and Professional Genres. Bern: Peter Lang, 123-148.
Bowker, Lynne / Pearson, Jennifer 2002. Working with specialised language: a practical guide to using corpora.
London / New York: Routledge.
Brown, Gillian / Yule, George 1983. Discourse analysis. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press
Brownlees, Nicholas 2006 (ed.). News Discourse in Early Modern Britain. Selected Papers of CHINED 2004. Bern:
Peter Lang, 91-104.
Brownlees, Nicholas 2012. The beginnings of periodical news (1620-1665). In Facchinetti et al. (eds). News as
Changing Texts. Corpora, Methodologies and Analysis. Cambridge: Cambridge Scholars, 5-48.
Bruton, Clive / Candlin, Christopher / Leather, Jonathan 1976b. Doctors in casualty: applying communicative
competence to components of specialist course design. International Review of Applied Linguistics in Language
Teaching 14(3), 245- 272.
Buchloh, Benjamin H.D., 2001: ‘Andy Warhol’s One-Dimensional Art: 1956 – 1966’. In Michelson, Annette (ed),
Andy Warhol. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1-46.
Burnard, Lou / Aston, Guy 1998. The BNC handbook: exploring the British National Corpus. Edinburgh: Edinburgh
University Press.
Caldas-Coulthard, Carmen Rosa 2003. Cross-cultural Representation of 'Otherness' in Media Discourse. In Weis,
Gilbert / Wodak, Ruth (eds) Critical Discourse Analysis. Houndmills: Palgrave Macmillan, 272-296.
Cameron, Glen T. 1994. Does Publicity Outperform Advertising: An Experimental Test of the Third-Party
Endorsement? Journal of Public Relations Research, 6 (3), 185-207.
Cameron Glen T. / Ju-Pak, Kuen-Hee 2000. Information pollution? Newspaper Research Journal 21: 65–77.
Carrier, David 1987. Artwriting. Amherst: University of Massachusetts Press.
Carter Ronald 1988. Front pages: lexis, style and newspapers reports. In Ghadessy, Mohsen (ed) Registers of Written
English. London: Pinter Publishers, 8-16.
Carter, Ronald / McCarthy, Michael 2004. ‘There’s millions of them’: hyperbole in everyday conversation, Journal of
Pragmatics 36 (2), 149–84.
Catenaccio, Paola 2008. Press releases as a hybrid genre: addressing the informative/promotional conundrum.
Pragmatics 18: 1, 9 – 31
Channell, Joanna 1994. Vague Language. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Chomsky, Noam 1962. Paper Given at the University of Texas, 1958. Third Texas Conference on Problems of
Linguistic Analysis in English. Austin, Texas.
Clark, Caroline M. de B. 2007. Dodging the Bullets and the Brickbats: The "Embedded" Voice in the Iraq War. LynX15
: 39-52.
Clark, Caroline 2010. Evidence of evidentiality in the quality press 1993 and 2005. Corpora, 5(2), 139-160.
Clayman, Steven E. 1990. From Talk to Text: Newspaper Accounts of Reporter-Source Interactions. Media, Culture,
235
and Society 12(1): 79-104.
Clayman, Steven E. / Heritage, John 2002. The News Interview: Journalists and Public Figures on the Air. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Conboy, Martin 2011. The Language of Newspapers. Socio-historical perspectives. London: Continuum.
Conboy, Martin 2013. The Language of the News. London/New York: Routledge
Cotter, Colleen 2010. News Talk: Investigating the Language of Journalism. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Coulthard, Malcolm 1977. An Introduction to Discourse Analysis. London / New York: Longman.
Crystal, David / Davy, Derek 1969. Investigating English style. London / New York: Longman.
Davies, Mark 2007. TIME Magazine Corpus (100 million words, 1920s-2000s).
Available online at http://corpus.byu.edu/time.
Davies, Mark 2008. The Corpus of Contemporary American English: 450 million words, 1990-present.
Available online at http://corpus.byu.edu/coca/.
Davies, Mark 2010. The Corpus of Historical American English: 400 million words, 1810-2009.
Available online at http://corpus.byu.edu/coha/.
De Haan, Pieter 1992. The optimum corpus sample size? In Leitner, Gerhard (ed.) New directions in English language
corpora: methodology, results, software developments. Berlin / New York: Mouton de Gruyter, 3-19.
De Smet, Hendrik 2005. A corpus of Late Modern English texts. ICAME—Journal 29: 69—82.
Denison, David 1994. A corpus of Late Modern English prose. In Kytö, Merja / Rissanen, Matti / Wright, Susan (eds)
Corpora across the centuries. Proceedings of the First International Colloquium on English Diachronic Corpora.
Amsterdam/Atlanta: Rodopi, 7-16.
Dossena, Marina / Fitzmaurice, Susan M. (eds) 2006. Business and Official Correspondence: Historical Investigations.
Bern: Peter Lang.
Dossena, Marina / Tieken-Boon van Ostade, Ingrid (eds) 2008. Studies in Late Modern English Correspondence:
Methodology and Data. Bern: Peter Lang
Dudley-Evans, Tony 1994. Genre analysis: an approach to text analysis for ESP. In Coulthard, Malcolm (ed), Advances
in written text analysis. London / New York: Routledge, 219-228.
Duguid, Anna 2010. Newspaper discourse informalisation: A diachronic comparison from keywords. Corpora, 5(2),
109-138.
Erjavec, Karmen 2004. Beyond advertising and journalism: hybrid promotional news discourse. Discourse & Society,
15(5), 553-578.
Erjavec, Karmen 2005. Hybrid public relations news discourse. European Journal of Communication, 20(2), 155-179.
Facchinetti, Roberta / Brownlees, Nicholas / Bös, Birte / Fries, Udo 2012. News as Changing Texts: Corpora,
Methodologies and Analysis. Cambridge: Cambridge Scholars.
Fairclough, Norman 1988. Discourse Representation in Media Discourse. Sociolinguistics 17, 125-139.
Fairclough, Norman 1992. Discourse and Social Change. Cambridge: Polity Press.
Fairclough, Norman 1995a. Critical Discourse Analysis: The Critical Study of. Language. London / New York:
Longman.
Fairclough, Norman 1995b. Media Discourse. London: Edward Arnold.
Fairclough, Norman 1998. Political Discourse in the Media: Analytical Framework. In Bell, Allan / Garrett, Peter (eds)
Approaches to Media Discourse. Oxford: Blackwell, 142-62.
236
Fillmore, Charles / Ide, Nancy / Jurafsky, Dan / Macleod, Catherine 1998. An American National Corpus: A Proposal.
In Proceedings of the First Annual Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation, 965-969. Paris: European
Language Resources Association.
Finn, David 1984. Is there a legitimate role for public relations in the arts? Annals of the American Academy of Political
and Social Science (471), 57-66.
Fletcher, Penny 2004. An editor’s guide to perfect press releases. The key to free success for your organization or
business. Charleston, SC: Book Surge.
Flowerdew, John 2002. Genre in the classroom: A linguistic approach. In A. Johns (ed) Genre in the classroom:
Multiple perspectives. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum, 91–103.
Fowler, Roger 1991. Language in the News: Discourse and Ideology in the Press. London / New York: Routledge.
Francis, Winthrop N. / Kucera, Henry 1979. Manual of information to accompany a standard corpus of present-day
edited American English, for use with digital computers. Revised and amplified version.
Available: http://khnt.hit.uib.no/icame/manuals/brown/index.htm.
Last access: 15 October 2012.
Frandsen, Finn / Johansen, Winni / Ellerup Nielsen, Anne 1997. International Markedskommunikation i en
Postmoderne Verden. Herning: Systime.
Freedman, Aviva / Medway, Peter 1994. Genre and the New Rhetoric. London: Taylor and Francis.
Fries, Udo 2006. Death Notices: The Birth of a Genre. In Facchinetti, Roberta / Rissanen, Matti (eds) Corpus-based
Studies of Diachronic English. Bern: Peter Lang.
Gabrielatos, Costas / Baker, Paul 2008. Fleeing, Sneaking, Flooding: A Corpus Analysis of Discursive Constructions of
Refugees and Asylum Seekers in the UK Press, 1996-2005. Journal of English Linguistics 36.1: 5–38.
Gabrielatos, Costas / McEnery, Tony / Diggle, Peter / Baker, Paul 2012. The peaks and troughs of corpus-based
contextual analysis. International Journal of Corpus Linguistics, 37(2), 151-175.
Garzone, Giuliana 2007. Genres, multimodality and the World-Wide Web: Theoretical Issues. In Garzone Giuliana /
Catenaccio Paola / Poncini G. (eds) Multimodality in Corporate Communication. Web genres and discursive identity.
Milano: FrancoAngeli, 15-30.
Garzone, Giuliana 2012. Why do genres change? In Garzone, Giuliana / Catenaccio, Paola / Degano, Chiara (eds)
Genre Change in the Contemporary World. Short -term Diachronic Perspectives. Bern: Peter Lang, 21-40.
Garzone, Giuliana / Catenaccio Paola / Degano, Chiara 2012 (eds). Genre change in the contemporary world : short-
term diachronic perspectives. Bern: Peter Lang.
Genoways, Hugh H. / Ireland, Lynn M. 2003. Museum administration: an introduction. Oxford, UK: Altamira Press.
Gavioli, Laura 2005. Exploring corpora for ESP learning. Amsterdam/Philadelphia: John Benjamins.
Goffman, Erving 1974. Frame Analysis. New York: Harper & Row.
Greatbatch, David 1998. Conversation analysis: Neutralism in British news interviews. In Bell, Allan / Garrett, Paul
(eds.) Approaches to media discourse. Oxford: Blackwell, 163-185.
Gripsrud, Jostein 1992. The Aesthetics and Politics of Melodrama. In Dalhgren, Peter / Sparks, Colin (eds). Journalism
and Popular Culture. London: Sage, 84-95.
Grunig, James E. 2009. Paradigms of global public relations in an age of digitalisation. PRism, 6 (2), 1-19.
Gürel, Eda / Kavak, Bahtisen 2010. A conceptual model for public relations in museums, European Journal of
Marketing, 44 (1/2), 42 – 65.
237
Gustafsson, Marita 1975. Some Syntactic Properties of English Law Language, University of Turku, Department of
English, Turku.
Halliday, Michael A. K, / Martin, Jim R. 1993. Writing science: Literacy and discursive power. London: Falmer Press.
Halliday, Michael A. K. 1978. Language as social semiotic. Edward Arnold, London.
Halliday, Michael A. K. / McIntosh, Angus, Strevens, Peter 1964. The linguistic sciences and language teaching.
London / New York: Longman.
Halliday, Michael / Hasan, Ruqaiya 1989. Language, Context and Text: aspects of language in a social-semiotic
perspective. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Harris, Roy 2003. The Necessity of Artspeak: the Language of the Arts in the Western Tradition. London: Continuum.
Hasan, Ruqaiya 1978. Text in the Systemic Functional Model. In Dressler W. (ed) Current Trend in Text Linguistics,
228-245. Berlin / New York: Mouton de Gruyter.
Hausmann, Carl R. 1991. ‘Figurative language in art history’, in Kemal, Salim / Gaskell, Ivan (eds) The Language of
Art History. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 101-128.
Henry, Alex / Roseberry, Robert L. 2001. ‘Using a small corpus to obtain data for teaching a genre’. In Ghadessy, M.,
Henry, Alex / Roseberry, Robert. L. (eds) Small corpus studies and ELT: theory and practice, xvii–xxiii.
Amsterdam/Philadelphia: John Benjamins.
Heritage, John / Clayman, Steven E. 2010. Talk in Action: Interactions, Identities, and Institutions. Chichester: Wiley-
Blackwell.
Heumann Gurian, Elaine 2006. Civilizing the Museum. Taylor & Francis: New York.
Hilpert, Martin / Gries, Stefan Th. 2009. Assessing frequency changes in multistage diachronic corpora: Applications
for historical corpus linguistics and the study of language acquisition. Literary and Linguistic Computing, 24, 385 –
401.
Hilpert, Martin / Gries, Stefan Th.. Quantitative approaches to diachronic corpus linguistics. In Kytö, Merja / Päivi,
Pahta (eds), The Cambridge Handbook of English Historical Linguistics. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press (to
appear).
Available: http://www.linguistics.ucsb.edu/faculty/stgries/research/overview-research.html
Last access: 11 December 2013.
Hodge, Bob 1979. Newspapers and Communities. In Fowler, Roger et al. (eds) Language and Control, 157-174.
London / New York: Routledge & Kegan Paul.
Hoey, Michael P. 1983. On the Surface of Discourse. London: George Allen & Unwin.
Hoffman, Donna L. / Novak, Tom P. 1996. Marketing in the Hypermedia Computer-Mediated Environment,
Conceptual Foundations. Journal of Marketing 60/3, 50-68.
Hofland, Knut / Stig, Johansson. 1982. Word frequencies in British and American English. Bergen: Norwegian
Computing Centre for the Humanities.
Hooper-Greenhill, Eilean 2000. Museums and the Interpretation of Visual Culture. London / New York: Routledge.
Hornby, Albert Sidney (eds) 1989. Oxford advanced learner’s dictionary of current English. 4th Edition. Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
Hundt, Marianne 1997. “Has BrE been catching up with AmE over the past 30 years?”. In Ljung, Magnus (ed) Corpus-
based Studies in English: Papers from the 17th International Conference on English Language Research on
Computerized Corpora (ICAME 17). Amsterdam/Atlanta: Rodopi, 135–151.
238
Hundt, Marianne / Mair, Christian 1999. “‘Agile” and “upright” genres: the corpus-based approach to language change
in progress, International Journal of Corpus Linguistics 4 (2), 221–42.
Hundt, Marianne / Sand, Andrea / Siemund, Rainer 1998. Manual of information to accompany the Freiburg - LOB
Corpus of British English (“FLOB”). Freiburg: Englisches Seminar, Albert-Ludwigs-Universitaet, Freiburg.
Hundt, Marianne / Sand, Andrea / Skandera, Paul 1999. Manual of information to accompany the Freiburg - Brown
Corpus of American English (“Frown”). Freiburg: Englisches Seminar, Albert-Ludwigs-Universitaet, Freiburg.
Hunston, Susan 2000. Evaluation and the Planes of Discourse: Status and Value in Persuasive Texts. In Hunston, Susan
/ Thompson, Geoffrey (eds) Evaluation in Text: Authorial Stance and the Construction of Discourse. Oxford: Oxford
University Press, 176-207.
Hunston, Susan 2002. Corpora in applied linguistics. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Hunston, Susan 2011. Corpus Approaches to Evaluation. London / New York: Routledge.
Hutchinson, Tom / Water, Alan 1987. English for Specific Purposes: a learning-centred approach. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Hymes, Dell 1972. Models of the interaction of language and social life. In Gumperz, John Joseph / Hymes, Dell H.
(eds) Directions in sociolinguistics: The ethnography of communication. New York: Holt, Rhinehart & Winston, 35-
71.
Hyon, Sunny 1996. Genre in three traditions: Implications for ESL. TESOL Quarterly, 30(4), 693–722.
Irvine, Martin 2004-2009. Approaches to the Art Media: Modes of Art Talk, Discourses, and the Construction of Art as
an Object.
Available: http://www9.georgetown.edu/faculty/irvinem/CCTP738/ArtMediaTheory.html.
Last access: 22nd Sep 2012.
Jacobi, Daniel / Poli, Marie Sylvie 1995. Scriptovisual documents in exhibitions: some theoretical guidelines. In Blais,
Andrèe (ed) Text in the Exhibition Medium. Montreal, Société des Musées Quebecois and Musée de la Civilisation, 49-
73.
Jacobs, Geert 1999a. Preformulating the News. Amsterdam/Philadelphia: John Benjamins.
Jacobs, Geert 1999b. Self-reference in press releases. Journal of Pragmatics 31, 219-242.
Janoschka, Anja 2004. Web Advertising: New Forms of Communication on the Internet. Amsterdam/Philadelphia: John
Benjamins.
Johansson, Stig (ed) 1982. Computer corpora in English language research. Bergen: NAVF.
Johansson, Stig 1986. The Tagged LOB Corpus. Bergen: Norwegian Computing Centre for the Humanities.
Johansson, Stig / Leech, Geoffrey N. / Goodluck, Helen 1978. Manual of Information to Accompany the Lancaster-
Oslo/Bergen Corpus of British English, for Use with Digital Computers. Department of English, University of Oslo.
Jones, Charles 1989. A history of English phonology. London / New York: Longman.
Jucker, Andreas H. 1992. Social Stylistics. Syntactic Variation in British Newspapers. Berlin / New York: Mouton de
Gruyter.
Jucker, Andreas H. 2005. News Discourse: mass media communication from the seventeenth to the twenty-first century.
In Skaffari, Janne et al. 2005 (eds) Opening Windows on Texts and Discourses of the Past. Amsterdam/Philadelphia:
John Benjamins, 7-22.
Jucker, Andreas H. (ed) 2009. Early Modern English News Discourse. Newspapers, pamphlets and scientific news
discourse. Amsterdam/Philadelphia: John Benjamins.
239
Kaplan, Andreas /Haenlein, Michael 2010. Users of the World, Unite! The Challenges and Opportunities of Social
Media. Business Horizons. 53/1, 59-68.
Karp, Ivan / Kreamer, Christine M. / Lavine, Steven D. 1992. Museums and communities: The politics of public culture.
Washington, DC: Smithsonian Institute.
Kavanagh, Gaynor (ed) 2005. Museum Provision and Professionalism. London / New York: Routledge.
Ketteman, Berhard 2013. Semiotics of Advertising and the Discourse of Consumption. AAA, Arbeiten aus Anglistik und
Amerikanistik38.1: 53-67.
Kilgarriff, Adam / Rychly, Pavel / Smrz, Pavel / Tugwell, David 2004. The Sketch Engine. Proceedings of Euralex.
Lorient, France; July 2004, 105.
Koller, Veronika 2004. Metaphor and gender in business media discourse: A critical cognitive study. Hampshire,
England: Palgrave Macmillan.
Kotler, Neil / Kotler, Philip / Kotler, Wendy I. 2008. Museum Strategy and Marketing: Designing Missions, Building
Audiences, Generating Revenue and Resources. 2nd edition. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Kučera, Henry / Francis, Winthrop N. 1967. Computational Analysis of Present-day American English. Providence:
Brown University press.
Kytö, Merja / Rissanen, Matti 1988. The Helsinki Corpus of English Texts: Classifying and coding the diachronic part.
In Kytö, Merja / Ihalainen, Ossi / Rissanen, Matti (eds) Corpus Linguistics, Hard and Soft: Proceedings of the Eighth
International Conference on English Language Research on Computerized Corpora. Vol. 2. Amsterdam/Atlanta:
Rodopi, 169-80.
Kytö, Merja / Rudanko, Juhani / Smitterberg, Erik 2000‚ Building a bridge between the present and the past: a corpus of
19th-century English. ICAME journal, 24: 85-97.
Landert, Daniela / Jucker, Andreas H. 2011. Private and Public in mass media communication: From letters to the editor
to online commentaries. Journal of Pragmatics 43, 5: 1422–1434.
Langer, John 1998. Tabloid Television: Popular Journalism and the ‘Other News’. London/New York: Routledge.
Lassen, Inger 2006. Is the press release a genre? A study of form and content. Discourse Studies, 8 (4): 503–30.
Lazzeretti, Cecilia 2010. A Study on Art Press Releases. MA dissertation, University of Modena and Reggio Emilia.
Lazzeretti, Cecilia / Bondi, Marina 2012. ‘A hypnotic viewing experience’. Promotional purpose in the language of
exhibition press announcements. Pragmatics, 22:4. 567-589
Leech, Geoffrey 2002. Recent grammatical change in English: Data, description, theory. In Aijmer, Karin / Altenberg,
Bengt (eds) Advances in Corpus Linguistics. Papers from the 23rd International Conference on English Language
Research on Computerized Corpora (ICAME 23). Amsterdam/Atlanta: Rodopi, 61–81.
Leech, Geoffrey 1992. ‘Corpora and theories of linguistic performance’. In Svartvik, Jan (ed) Directions in corpus
linguistics: proceedings of Nobel symposium 82. Berlin / New York: Mouton de Gruyter, 125-148.
Leech, Geoffrey 1997. “Teaching and language corpora: a convergence”. In Wichmann, Anne / Fligelstone / Steven,
McEnery, Tony / Knowles, Gerry (eds) Teaching and language corpora. New York: Addison Wesley Longman Inc. ,
1-23.
Leech, Geoffrey / Smith, Nicholas 2006. Recent grammatical change in written English 1961–1992: Some preliminary
findings of a comparison of American with British English. In Renouf, Antoinette / Kehoe, Andrew (eds) The Changing
Face of Corpus Linguistics. Amsterdam/Atlanta: Rodopi, 186–204.
240
Lehmann, Hans Martin / auf dem Keller, Caren / Ruef, Beni 2006. Zen Corpus 1.0. In Facchinetti Roberta / Rissanen,
Matti (eds) Corpus-based Studies of Diachronic English.. Bern: Peter Lang, 135-155.
Lenaerts, Gilberte 2002. In pursuit of the functional quality of political press releases. Document Design 3: 210-223.
Lewis, David D. / Yang, Yiming/ Rose, Toni G. / Li, Fan 2004. RCV1: A New Benchmark Collection for Text
Categorization Research. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 5:361-397.
Lewis, Geoffrey D. The History of Museums. Encyclopedia Britannica Online.
Available: http://www.britannica.com/EBchecked/topic/398827/history.
Last access: 01 January, 2012.
Ljiung, Magnus 1997. The English of British Tabloids and Heavies. Differences and Similarities. In Falk, J.,
Magnusson, G., Melchers, G. and Nilsson, B. (eds) Norm, Variation and Change in Language, Stockholm Studies in
Modern Philology, 11. Stockholm: Almqvist & Wiksell International, 133-48.
Ljiung, Magnus 2002. What vocabulary tells us about genre differences: A study of lexis in five newspaper genres. In
Breivik, Leiv Egil / Hasselgren, Angela (eds) From the Colt’s Mouth... and Others. Amsterdam/Atlanta: Rodopi, 181-
196.
Lord, Barry / Lord, Gail Dexter 2002. The Manual of Museum Exhibitions. Walnut Creek, CA: AltaMira Press.
Louw, William E. 2000. Contextual prosodic theory: Bringing semantic prosodies to life. In Heffer, C. / Sauntson, H.
(eds) Words in Context: A Tribute to John Sinclair on his Retirement. Birmingham: University of Birmingham, 48-
94.
Mair, Christian 1997. Parallel corpora: a real-time approach to the study of language change in progress. In Ljung,
Magnus (ed) Corpus-based studies in English. Amsterdam/Atlanta: Rodopi,195-209.
Mair, Christian 2006. Twentieth-century English: History, variation and standardization. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Marchi, Anna 2010. 'The moral in the story': A diachronic investigation of lexicalised morality in the UK press.
Corpora, 5(2), 161-189.
Martin, James R. 1984. Language, register and genre. In Christie, F. (ed), Language Studies: Children's Writing:
Reader. Geelong: Deakin University Press, 21-30.
Martin, James R. 1985. Factual Writing: Exploring and Challenging Social Reality. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Martin, James R. 1992. English text: System and structure. Amsterdam/Philadelphia: John Benjamins.
Martin, James R. 2002. “A universe of meaning – How many practices?”. In Johns, Ann M. (ed) Genre in the
Classroom: Multiple Perspectives. Mawah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum, 269-278.
Martin, James R. / White, Peter R.R.2005. The Language of Evaluation. Appraisal in English. New York: Palgrave
Macmillan.
Marwick, Alice, E. / Boyd, Danah 2010. I Tweet Honestly, I Tweet Passionately: Twitter Users, Context Collapse, and
the Imagined Audience. New Media & Society. 13/1, 114-133.
McCarthy, Kevin F. / Brooks, Arthur / Lowell, Julia F. / Zakaras, Laura 2001. The Performing Arts in a New Era. Santa
Monica, CA: RAND Corporation.
McEnery, Tony / Xiao, Richard 2005. HELP or HELP to: What do corpora have to say?. English Studies, 86 (2), 161–
187.
McEnery, Tony / Xiao, Richard / Tono, Yukio 2006. Corpus-based Language Studies: An Advanced Resource Book.
London/New York: Routledge.
241
McFelter, Gypsy 2006. Is the Price Right? Admission Fees and Free Admission in American Art Museums. PhD Thesis.
Pleasant Hill, CA: John F. Kennedy University Library.
McFelter, Gypsy 2007. The Cost of Free - Admission Fees at American Art Museums. Museum News, 60.
McIntyre, Catherine V. / Fife, Bruce 2008. Writing effective news releases… How to get free publicity for yourself, your
business or your organization. 2nd edition. Colorado Springs, CO: Piccadilly books.
McLaren, Yvonne / Gurâu, Calin 2005. Characterising the genre of the corporate press release. LSP and Professional
Communication. 5/1: 10-30.
McLean, Fiona 2012. Marketing the museum. London / New York: Routledge.
McLean, Kathleen 1993. Planning for people in museum exhibitions. Washington, DC: Association of Science
Technology Center.
McManus, Paulette 2000. Archaeological displays and the public: museology and interpretation. London: Archetype
Publications.
Merlini Barbaresi, Lavinia 2004. A model for defining complexity in descriptive text type. Folia Linguistica 38: 355
Merlini Barbaresi, Lavinia 2009. The Speaker’s Imprint in Descriptive Discourse. In Radighieri, Sara / Tucker, Paul
(eds) Point of View: Description and Evaluation across Discourses. Roma: officina edizioni, 15-36.
Meurman-Solin, Anneli / Päivi, Pahta 2006. Circumstantial adverbials in discourse: a synchronic and a diachronic
perspective. In Renouf, Antoinette / Kehoe, Andrew (eds) The Changing Face of Corpus Linguistics.
Amsterdam/Atlanta: Rodopi, 117-141.
Millar, Neil 2009. Modal verbs in TIME: Frequency changes 1923–2006. International Journal of Corpus Linguistics,
14 (2), 191–220.
Miller, Carolyn R. 1984. Genre as Social Action. Quarterly Journal of Speech, 70, 151-167.
Miller, Carolyn R. 1994. Genre as Social Action. In Freedman Aviva / Medway, Peter (eds), Genre and the New
Rhetoric. London: Taylor & Francis, 23-42.
Minugh, David 2000. ‘You people use such weird expressions’. The frequency of idioms in newspaper CDs as corpora.
In Kirk, John M. (ed) Corpora Galore: Analyses and Techniques in Describing English, 57-71.
Mosquera, Gerardo 2010. ‘Walking with the devil’. Art, Culture, and Internationalization. In Anheier, Helmut K. / Isar,
Yudhishthir R. (eds) Cultures and Globalization: Cultural Expression, Creativity and Innovation. London: Sage
Publications, 47-56.
Ni, Ybin 2003. Noun Phrases in Media Texts. In Aitchison, James / Lewis, Diana M. (eds) New Media Language.
London / New York: Routledge, 160 -168.
Nobili, Paola 2003. Camminare per quadri. Il linguaggio divulgativo dell’arte. Bologna: CLUEB.
Paganoni, Maria Cristina 2009. 'The Opinion and the Counter Opinion': News Framing and Double Voicing on Al
Jazeera English. Linguistic Insights – Studies in language and Communication, 115: 237-257.
Paltridge, Brian 2006. Discourse Analysis. London: Continuum.
Paltridge, Brian / Starfield, Sue / Ravelli, Louise J. / Tuckwell, Kathryn 2012. Change and stability: Examining the
macrostructures of doctoral theses in the visual and performing arts. Journal of English for Academic Purposes 11,
332–344.
Pander Maat, Henk 2007. How promotional language in press releases is dealt with by journalists: genre mixing or
genre conflict? Journal Of Business Communication 44.1: 59-95.
Panofsky, Erwin 1955. Meaning in the VisualArts. Chicago: The University of Chicago Press.
242
Paolini, Paolo / Barbieri, Thimoty / Loiudice, Paolo / Alonzo, Francesca / Zanti, Marco 2000. Visiting a museum
together: how to share a visit to a virtual world. Journal of the American Society for Information Science 51.1, 33-38.
Partington, Alan 1998. Patterns and Meanings. Amsterdam/Philadelphia: John Benjamins.
Partington, Alan 2004. Corpora and discourse, a most congruous beast. In Partington, Alan / Morley, John / Haarman,
Louann (eds) Corpora and Discourse. Bern: Peter Lang, 11-20.
Partington, Alan 2009. Evaluating evaluation and some concluding reflections on CADS. In Morley, John / Bayley,
Paul (eds) Corpus Assisted Discourse Studies on the Iraq Conflict: Wording the War. London / New York: Routledge,
261-303.
Partington, Alan 2010. Modern diachronic corpus-assisted discourse studies (MD-CADS) on UK newspapers: An
overview of the project. Corpora, 5(2), 83-108.
Partington, Alan 2012. The changing discourses on antisemitism in the UK press from 1993 to 2009: A modern-
diachronic corpus-assisted discourse study. Journal of Language and Politics, 11 (1) 51-76 (26).
Patrona, Marianna 2012. Journalists on the news: The structured panel discussion as a form of broadcast talk. Discourse
& Society, 23(2), 145-162.
Pollit, Jerome Jordan / Seaver, James E. 1974. The Ancient View of Greek Art: Criticism, History and Terminology.
New Haven: Yale University Press.
Radighieri, Sara 2005. ‘Arts in the News: Evaluative language use in the “art review”’. Proceedings from the Corpus
Linguistic Conference Series 1.
Available: http://www.corpus.bham.ac.uk/PCLC/
Last access: 13 September 2012
Radighieri, Sara 2009. Spatial description in the art exhibition review: reference as pointing and wandering. In
Radighieri, Sara / Tucker, Paul (eds) Point of View. Description and Evaluation across Discourses. Rome: officina
edizioni, 97 -112.
Renouf, Antoinette 2002. The time dimension in modern corpus linguistics. In: Kettemann, Bernhard / Marko, George
(eds.) Teaching and learning by doing corpus analysis. Papers from the 4th international conference on teaching and
learning corpora, Graz, 19-24 July 2000. Amsterdam/Atlanta: Rodopi, 27-41.
Renouf, Antoinette 2007a. Corpus development 25 years on: from super-corpus to cyber-corpus. In Facchinetti, Roberta
(ed.) Corpus Linguistics 25 Years on. Amsterdam/Atlanta: Rodopi, 27-50.
Renouf, Antoinette 2007b. Tracing lexical productivity and creativity in the British media: The Chavs and the Chav-
Nots. In Munat, Judith (ed.), Lexical Creativity, Texts and Contexts. Amsterdam/Philadelphia: John Benjamins, 61-89.
Rentschler, Ruth / Hede, Anne-Marie (eds) 2007. Museum marketing: competing in the global marketplace. Oxford,
UK: Elsevier.
Resche, Catherine 2003. The Decoding of a Particular Genre: The US Federal Reserve's Press Releases. ASp: La revue
du GERAS39-40: 21-35.
Reuter, Yves 1998. La Description. Théories, recherches, formation, enseignement. Villeneuve d'Ascq, Septentrion.
Reuter, Yves 2000. La Description. Des Théories à l’Enseignement. Issy-les-Moulineaux : ESF éd.
Rissanen, Matti 1989. Three problems connected with the use of diachronic corpora. ICAME Journal 13, 16-19.
Rissanen, Matti 1992. The diachronic corpus as a window to the history of English. In Svartvik, Jan (ed) Directions in
corpus linguistics: proceedings of Nobel Symposium. Berlin / New York: Mouton de Gruyter, 185-205.
Rissanen, Matti 2000. The world of English historical corpora. Journal of English Linguistics, 28 (1): 7-20.
243
Rissanen, Matti / Kytö, Merja / Palander-Collin, Minna 1993 (eds). Early English in the Computer Age: Exploration
through the Helsinki Corpus. Topics in English Linguistics, 11. Berlin / New York: Mouton de Gruyter.
Rizzo, Ilde / Mignosa, Anna (eds) 2013. Handbook on the Economics of Cultural Heritage. Cheltenham: Edward Elgar
Publishing.
Rosenblum, Naomi 2007. A World History of Photography. New York : Abbeville Press Publishers.
Rule, Alix / Levine, David 2012. International Art English. Triple Canopy, 16.
Available: http://canopycanopycanopy.com/issues/16/contents/international_art_english
Last accessed: 3 May 2014.
Samson, Denis 1995. Nous sommes tous des poissons : les strategies de lecture des visiteurs d’exposition. PhD
dissertation. Université du Québec à Montréal, Montréal.
Schiele, Bernard 1995. Text in the exhibition medium. In Blais, Andrèe (ed) Text in the Exhibition Medium, 33-47.
Montreal, Société des Musées Quebecois and Musée de la Civilisation.
Schneider, Dietmar 1999. ‘Euro-this, Euro-that, and now Euro-money (The Guardian 1996) – Computer-Assisted
Studies of British Newspaper Language’. In Carls, Uwe / Lucko, Peter (eds) Form, Function and Variation in English.
Studies in Honour of Klaus Hansen. Bern: Peter Lang, 89-99.
Schneider, Kristina 1999. Exploring the roots of popular English news writing: a preliminary report’. In Diller, Hans
Juergen Diller et al. (eds.) English Via Various Media. Heidelberg: Winter, 201-22.
Schneider, Kristina 2000. Popular and quality papers in the Rostock Historical Newspaper Corpus. In Mair, Christian /
Hundt, Marianne (eds) Corpus Linguistics and Linguistic Theory. Papers from the Twentieth International Conference
on English Language Research on Computerized Corpora (ICAME 20). Amsterdam/Atlanta: Rodopi, 321–337.
Schoen, Mary P. 2005. Museum-public relationships: exploring the relationship management theory of public relations.
MA thesis, Louisiana State University, Baton Rouge, LA.
Schwarz-Friesel, Monika / Kromminga, Jan-Henning 2013. "9/11 as a global catastrophe. The cognitive-linguistic
processing of 11 September 2001 in the German media coverage": An analysis in the context of critical cognitive
linguistics. Sprachtheorie und germanistische Linguistik23.1:1-22.
Scott, Mike 2004. Wordsmith Tools: Online Manual.
Accessed at <http://www.lexically.net/Downloads/Version6/html/Index.html>.
Scott, Mike 2007. WordSmith Tools.
Accessed at <http://www.lexically.net/ wordsmith/>
Short, Mick / Wynne, Martin / Semino, Elena 1999. ‘Reading reports: discourse presentation in a corpus of narratives,
with special reference to news reports’. In Simon-Vandenbergen, Anne-Marie (ed) English Via Various Media, special
issue of Anglistik & Englischunterricht 62. Universitaetsverlag Winter, 39–65.
Siemund, Rainer / Claudia Claridge. 1997. The Lampeter Corpus of Early Modern English Tracts. ICAME Journal 21:
61–70.
Sinclair, John M. 1987. Collins COBUILD English Language Dictionary. London: Collins.
Sinclair, John M. 1990. Collins COBUILD English Grammar. London: Collins.
Sinclair, John M. 1991. Corpus, Concordance, Collocation. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Sinclair, John M. 1992. ‘The automatic analysis of corpora’. n Svartvik, Jan (ed.), Directions in Corpus Linguistics.
Proceedings of Nobel Symposium 82, Stockholm 1991. Berlin / New York: Mouton de Gruyter, 379-397.
Sinclair, John M. 1996. EAGLES. Preliminary recommendations on Corpus Typology. EAG—TCWG—CTYP/P. Pisa:
244
ILC-CNR
Sinclair, John M. 1997. Corpus evidence in language description. In Wichmann, Anne / Fligelstone, Steven / McEnery,
Tony / Knowles, Gerry (eds.). Teaching and language corpora. New York: Addison Wesley Longman Inc., 27-39.
Sinclair, John M. 2003. Reading Concordances. London: Pearson Longman.
Sleurs, Kim / Jacobs,Geert / Van Waes, Luuk 2003. Constructing press releases, constructing quotations. An
ethnographic perspective on press releases. Journal of Sociolinguistics 7.2: 192-212.
Sleurs, Kim/ Jacobs, Geert 2005. Beyond preformulation: An ethnographic perspective on press releases. Journal of
Pragmatics 37: 1251-1273.
Sloan, David / Lisa Mullikin Parcell (eds), 2002. American Journalism: History, Principles, Practices. Jefferson, NC:
McFarland.
Smith, Carlota S. 2003. Modes of Discourse: the Local Structure of Texts. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Strobbe, Ilse / Jacobs, Geert 2005. E-releases: A view from linguistic pragmatics. Public Relations Review 31, 289-291.
Stubbs, Michael 1996. Text and Corpus Analysis. Computer-Assisted Studies of Language and Culture. Oxford:
Blackwell.
Stubbs, Michael 2001. Words and Phrases. Corpus Studies of Lexical Semantics. Oxford: Blackwell.
Swales, John M. 1974. Notes on the function of attributive en-participles in scientific discourse. Papers for Special
University Purposes (1), ELSU, University of Khartoum Press.
Swales, John M. 1981. Aspects of article introductions. Aston ESP Research Report No. 1, Language Studies Unit,
University of Aston in Birmingham, Birmingham, UK.
Swales, John M. 1986. A genre-based approach to language across the curriculum. Language Across the Curriculum,
10-22.
Swales, John M. 1990. Genre analysis: English in academic and research settings. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
Swales, John M. 2004a. Research Genres: Explorations and Applications. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Swales, John M. 2004b. Evolution in the discourse of art criticism. The case of Thomas Eakins. In Bäklund, I. /
Melander Maartala, U. / Börestam U. /Näslund, H. (eds) Text I arbeTe/Text at Work. Uppsala: Institutionen för
Nordiska Sprak vid Uppsala Universitet.
Swales, John M. / Bhatia, Vijay K. 1983. An approach to the linguistic study of legal documents. Fachsprache, 5/3, 98-
109.
Taavitsainen, Irma / Pahta, Päivi (eds.) 2010. Early Modern English Medical Texts: Corpus description and studies.
Amsterdam/Philadelphia: John Benjamins.
Talbot, Mary 1995. 'Randy fish boss branded a stinker': coherence and the construction of masculinities in a British
tabloid newspaper. Nordlyd: Tromsö University Working Papers on Language and Linguistics 23: 259-270.
Tognini-Bonelli, Elena 2001. Corpus Linguistics at Work. Amsterdam/Philadelphia: John Benjamins.
Trew, Tony 1979. ‘What the papers say: linguistic variation and ideological difference’. In Fowler, Roger et al. (eds)
Language and Control. London: Routledge and Keegan Paul, 117-56.
Tucker, Paul 2003. Evaluation in the Art-Historical Research Article. Journal of English for Academic Purposes 2: 291-
312.
Tucker, Paul 2004. Evaluation and Interpretation in Art-Historical Discourse. In Del Lungo Camiciotti, Gabriella /
245
Tognini Bonelli, Elena (eds) Academic Discourse: New Insights into Evaluation. Bern: Peter Lang, 161-179.
Tucker Paul 2013. Justificatory arguments in writing on art. In Bamford, Julia / Cavalieri, Silvia / Diani, Giuliana (eds)
Variation and Change in Spoken and Written Discourse: Perspectives from corpus linguistics.
Amsterdam/Philadelphia: John Benjamins, 185-202.
Ungerer, Friedrich 2004. Ads as news stories, news stories as ads. Text 24:307-28.
Van Dijk, Teun A. 1985. Handbook of Discourse Analysis, vol. 2. London: Academic Press.
Van Dijk, Teun A. 1988a. News as Discourse. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Van Dijk, Teun A. 1988b. News Analysis. Case studies of International and National News in the Press. Hillsdale, NJ:
Lawrence Erlbaum.
Verschueren, Jeff 1985. International News Reporting: Metapragmatic Metaphors and the U-2.
Amsterdam/Philadelphia: John Benjamins.
Walters, Timothy N. / Walters, Lynne M. 1992. It loses something in the translation. Syntax and survival of keywords
in science and non science press releases. Science Communication 18.2: 165-180.
Walters, Timothy N. / Walters, Lynne M. / Starr, Douglas P. 1994. After the Highwayman: Syntax and Successful
Placement of Press Releases in Newspapers. Public Relations Review 20(4): 345–56.
Werlich, Egon 1976. A text grammar of English. Heidelberg: Quelle & Meyer.
Weiss, Gilbert / Wodak, Ruth (eds) 2003. Critical Discourse Analysis. Theory and Interdisciplinarity. Houndmills:
Palgrave Macmillan.
Westin, Ingrid 2002. Language Change in English Newspaper Editorials. Amsterdam/Atlanta: Rodopi.
White, Peter R.R. 1997. Death, disruption and the moral order: the narrative impulse in mass-media „hard news‟
reporting. In Christie, Frances / Martin, James R. (eds) Genres and Institutions: Social Processes in the Workplace and
School. London: Cassell, 101-133.
White, Peter R.R. 1998. Telling Media Tales: the News Story As Rhetoric. Doctoral Dissertation, University of Sydney,
Sydney.
Whittaker, Rachel / Luisa M. Rojo 1999. A Dialogue with Bureaucracy: Register, Genre and Information Management
as Constraints on Interchangeability. Journal of Pragmatics , 31,149-189.
Widdowson, Henry G. 1973. An Applied Linguistic Approach to Discourse Analysis. Doctoral Dissertation, Dept. of
Linguistics, University of Edinburgh.
Yates, JoAnne / Orlikowski, Wanda J. 1992. Genres of organizational communication - a structurational approach to
studying communication and media. Academy of Management Review, 17(2), 299-326.
246
Appendix – EPA Diacorpus: list of EPAs
N. Country City Museum Title Date Decade
Glasgow's Giorgione at
1 UK London National Gallery the National Gallery 22/10/1953 1950
An Exhibition of Playing
2 UK London The Victoria and Albert Museum Cards and Games 01/11/1950 1950
An Exhibition of the Sir
William Rothenstein
Collection of Indian
3 UK London The Victoria and Albert Museum Drawings 01/03/1951 1950
Photographs of Indian
Sculpture by Raymond
4 UK London The Victoria and Albert Museum Burnier 01/06/1952 1950
English Life: How
Ancestors Lived from
5 UK London The Victoria and Albert Museum 1700 to 1850 01/03/1953 1950
Futher Light on a 15th
6 UK London National Gallery Century Flemish Picture 16/07/1954 1950
International Colour
7 UK London The Victoria and Albert Museum Woodcut Exhibition 01/09/1954 1950
Exhibition of French
8 UK London The Victoria and Albert Museum Theatre Art 01/03/1955 1950
9 UK London National Gallery Francia's Virgin and Child 12/05/1955 1950
A Display of
Contemporary
Scandinavian Furnishing
10 UK London The Victoria and Albert Museum Fabrics and Wallpapers 01/03/1956 1950
19th Century French
11 UK London National Gallery Paintings 24/04/1956 1950
Reynolds' Portrait of Lady
12 UK London National Gallery Frances Finch 15/06/1956 1950
Van Eyck's Madonna and
13 UK London National Gallery Child 26/10/1956 1950
The National Gallery's
New Picture by Van der
14 UK London National Gallery Weiden 13/03/1957 1950
William Blake Centenary
15 UK London The Victoria and Albert Museum Exhibition 01/06/1957 1950
A Sketch by Tiepolo
16 UK London National Gallery acquired 19/07/1957 1950
Gift of a Picture by
17 UK London National Gallery Lastman 30/07/1957 1950
18 UK London National Gallery A new Rembrandt 16/12/1957 1950
Exhibition of English
19 UK London Royal Academy of Arts Watercolours 01/01/1958 1950
Collection of the Late Sir
20 UK London Royal Academy of Arts J. B. Robinson 01/01/1958 1950
21 UK London The Victoria and Albert Museum American Prints 01/02/1958 1950
22 UK London National Gallery The N.G. new Poussin 27/02/1958 1950
247
Exhibition of Mr. Paul
23 UK London Royal Academy of Arts Oppè's Collection 27/02/1958 1950
24 UK London National Gallery The Memling Tryptich 20/03/1958 1950
A Monet bought for the
25 UK London National Gallery N.G. 01/05/1958 1950
A Vouet purchased for the
26 UK London National Gallery N.G. 27/10/1958 1950
The N.G.' s new Uccello
27 UK London National Gallery exhibited 13/05/1959 1950
Drawings by Italian
28 UK London The Victoria and Albert Museum Artists: 1500-1800 01/06/1959 1950
29 UK London National Gallery Jordaens Double Portrait 21/08/1959 1950
Two 17th Century Italian
30 UK London National Gallery Acquisitions 05/11/1959 1950
The N.G. acquires its
31 UK London National Gallery largest Rembrandt 01/02/1960 1960
Rembrandt's Equestrian
32 UK London National Gallery Portrait on Exhibition 14/03/1960 1960
Gainsborough's 'Mr. And
33 UK London National Gallery Mrs. Andrews' 31/05/1960 1960
34 UK London National Gallery Renoir Portrait 02/08/1960 1960
Lady of Fashion: Heather
Firbank (1888-1954) and
what she wore between
35 UK London The Victoria and Albert Museum 1908 and 1921 01/09/1960 1960
36 UK London National Gallery Au Revoir 24/11/1960 1960
37 UK London National Gallery Five Paintings by Boudin 24/01/1961 1960
38 UK London National Gallery An Exhibition at the N.G. 22/02/1961 1960
Centenary Exhibition of
39 UK London The Victoria and Albert Museum Kuniyoshi (1861-1961) 01/04/1961 1960
40 UK London National Gallery Two famous Renoirs 21/04/1961 1960
Goya's Duke of
41 UK London National Gallery Wellington 03/08/1961 1960
42 UK London National Gallery Ruben's Adoration 04/10/1961 1960
Royal Academy Diploma
43 UK London Royal Academy of Arts Gallery 01/02/1962 1960
Drawings from the Bruce
44 UK London The Victoria and Albert Museum Ingram Collection 01/04/1962 1960
45 UK London National Gallery A Rare French Painting 10/12/1962 1960
46 UK London Royal Academy of Arts Art: Usa: Now 01/01/1963 1960
47 UK London National Gallery A Unique German Picture 21/01/1963 1960
Art Nouveau Designs and
Posters by Alphonse
48 UK London The Victoria and Albert Museum Mucha 01/04/1963 1960
49 UK London National Gallery A Cezanne landscape 17/04/1963 1960
The Leonardo Cartoon on
50 UK London National Gallery show 26/03/1964 1960
51 UK London The Victoria and Albert Museum Shakespeare 01/04/1964 1960
52 UK London National Gallery A famous Veronese 14/05/1965 1960
53 UK London The Victoria and Albert Museum Contemporary Calligraphy 01/10/1965 1960
248
An Exhibition of Goya's
54 UK London National Gallery Portraits 10/01/1966 1960
Half a Century of Modern
55 UK London The Victoria and Albert Museum Design 01/09/1966 1960
Ballet Designs and
56 UK London The Victoria and Albert Museum Illustrations 01/04/1967 1960
57 UK London National Gallery The Judgement of Paris 07/06/1967 1960
Two Centuries of Danish
58 UK London The Victoria and Albert Museum Design 01/03/1968 1960
59 UK London National Gallery Canaletto Bicenteneary 26/08/1968 1960
Photographs by Henri
60 UK London The Victoria and Albert Museum Cartier Bresson 01/01/1969 1960
Titian's Bacchus and
61 UK London National Gallery Ariadne 03/06/1969 1960
62 UK London The Victoria and Albert Museum Winnie the Pooh 01/11/1969 1960
A Decade of English
63 UK London The Victoria and Albert Museum Naturalism, 1810-1820 01/01/1970 1970
64 UK London National Gallery Four Artists as Collectors 18/08/1970 1970
65 UK London National Gallery Acquisition of Saint'Ivo 23/03/1971 1970
66 UK London Royal Academy of Arts Ensor to Permeke 01/09/1971 1970
Fashion: an Anthology by
67 UK London The Victoria and Albert Museum Cecil Beaton 01/09/1971 1970
68 UK London Royal Academy of Arts British Sculptors '72 03/12/1971 1970
Dante Gabriele Rossetti:
69 UK London Royal Academy of Arts Painter and Poet 01/01/1972 1970
John Blake Recente
70 UK London The Victoria and Albert Museum Works 01/01/1972 1970
71 UK London National Gallery Alexander Gift 03/08/1972 1970
72 UK London National Gallery Important Paintings 18/09/1972 1970
73 UK London Royal Academy of Arts Futurismo 1909-1919 01/01/1973 1970
74 UK London Royal Academy of Arts 205th Summer Exhibition 01/05/1973 1970
Old Master Drawings
75 UK London The Victoria and Albert Museum from Chatsworth 01/10/1973 1970
76 UK London National Gallery National Art Fund 03/10/1973 1970
Impressionism - Its
77 UK London Royal Academy of Arts Masters 01/02/1974 1970
Dutch Townscape
78 UK London National Gallery Paintings 11/02/1974 1970
79 UK London The Victoria and Albert Museum Dominick Labino 01/09/1974 1970
Joshua Cristall 1767 -
80 UK London The Victoria and Albert Museum 1847 01/01/1975 1970
81 UK London National Gallery Artist versus Nature 30/04/1975 1970
Landscape Masterpieces
82 UK London Royal Academy of Arts from Soviet Museums 01/10/1975 1970
GOLDEN AGE OF
83 UK London Royal Academy of Arts SPANISH PAINTING 01/01/1976 1970
84 UK London The Victoria and Albert Museum Jewellry in Europe 01/01/1976 1970
L.S. Lowry R.A 1887 -
85 UK London Royal Academy of Arts 1976 01/07/1976 1970
Art in Seventeenth
86 UK London National Gallery Century Holland 10/09/1976 1970
249
87 UK London The Victoria and Albert Museum Keith Murray 01/02/1977 1970
88 UK London National Gallery A Royal Subject 15/07/1977 1970
British Painting 1952 -
89 UK London Royal Academy of Arts 1977 01/09/1977 1970
90 UK London Royal Academy of Arts Robert Motherwell 01/01/1978 1970
Cars. Colour photographs
91 UK London The Victoria and Albert Museum by Lagdon Clay 01/05/1978 1970
92 UK London National Gallery The Artist's Eye 19/05/1978 1970
93 UK London National Gallery Baroque Paintings 26/03/1979 1970
94 UK London The Victoria and Albert Museum The Art of Hollywoond 01/08/1979 1970
95 UK London Royal Academy of Arts Post Impressionism 01/11/1979 1970
96 UK London The Victoria and Albert Museum Her Majesty the Queen 01/02/1980 1980
97 UK London Royal Academy of Arts Victor Dasmore 01/09/1980 1980
98 UK London National Gallery Titian and Rembrandt 25/09/1980 1980
The New Spirit in
99 UK London Royal Academy of Arts Painting 01/10/1980 1980
100 UK London Royal Academy of Arts Honorè Daumier 01/01/1981 1980
Spotlight. Four Centuries
101 UK London The Victoria and Albert Museum of Ballet Costumes 01/02/1981 1980
102 UK London National Gallery El Greco to Goya 20/05/1981 1980
103 UK London Royal Academy of Arts Harold Gilman 01/02/1982 1980
104 UK London National Gallery Watch this Space 28/04/1982 1980
Humphry Repton.
105 UK London The Victoria and Albert Museum Landscape Gardener 01/11/1982 1980
106 UK London The Victoria and Albert Museum Japanese Ceramics Today 01/02/1983 1980
107 UK London National Gallery Manet at Work 22/07/1983 1980
Treasures of Ancient
108 UK London Royal Academy of Arts Nigeria 01/10/1983 1980
The Age of Vermeer and
109 UK London Royal Academy of Arts De Hooch 01/01/1984 1980
The Golden Age of British
110 UK London The Victoria and Albert Museum Photography 01/04/1984 1980
111 UK London National Gallery Danish Painting 25/04/1984 1980
Manet to Hockney:
Modern Artists' Illustrated
112 UK London The Victoria and Albert Museum books 01/01/1985 1980
113 UK London National Gallery Masterpieces from Ireland 05/03/1985 1980
114 UK London Royal Academy of Arts Chagall 01/01/1986 1980
115 UK London Royal Academy of Arts Reynolds 01/01/1986 1980
116 UK London National Gallery Dutch Landscapes 30/05/1986 1980
117 UK London The Victoria and Albert Museum Weimar Ceramics 01/07/1986 1980
Richard Redgrave R.A.
118 UK London The Victoria and Albert Museum 1804-1888 01/02/1987 1980
119 UK London National Gallery Bodylines 11/02/1987 1980
120 UK London Royal Academy of Arts Jewels of the Ancients 01/05/1987 1980
121 UK London National Gallery French Paintings 25/02/1988 1980
Cezanne: the Early years
122 UK London Royal Academy of Arts 1859-1872 01/04/1988 1980
250
Contemporary French
123 UK London The Victoria and Albert Museum Furniture 01/06/1988 1980
124 UK London The Victoria and Albert Museum William de Morgan 01/01/1989 1980
125 UK London National Gallery Art in the Making 18/08/1989 1980
126 UK London Royal Academy of Arts The Art of Photography 01/09/1989 1980
127 UK London National Gallery Winter Landscape 14/03/1990 1990
128 UK London The Victoria and Albert Museum Flower Silks 01/07/1990 1990
Egon Schiele and his
129 UK London Royal Academy of Arts Contemporaries 01/11/1990 1990
130 UK London National Gallery Guercino in Britain 05/06/1991 1990
131 UK London Royal Academy of Arts Pop Art 01/09/1991 1990
132 UK London The Victoria and Albert Museum Visions of Japan 01/09/1991 1990
133 UK London Royal Academy of Arts Andrea Mantegna 01/01/1992 1990
134 UK London National Gallery Edvard Munch 01/06/1992 1990
135 UK London The Victoria and Albert Museum Textiles by Sculptors 01/06/1992 1990
Georges Rouault: the
136 UK London Royal Academy of Arts Early years, 1903- 1920 01/03/1993 1990
137 UK London The Victoria and Albert Museum Fabergè: Imperial Jeweller 01/09/1993 1990
Claude. The Poetic
138 UK London National Gallery Landscape 06/10/1993 1990
139 UK London National Gallery The Young Michelangelo 17/06/1994 1990
Kalighat: Indian Popular
140 UK London The Victoria and Albert Museum Painting 01/07/1994 1990
141 UK London Royal Academy of Arts The Glory of Venice 01/09/1994 1990
142 UK London National Gallery Gombrich on Shadows 24/01/1995 1990
143 UK London The Victoria and Albert Museum The Rule of Taste 01/04/1995 1990
144 UK London Royal Academy of Arts David Hockney 01/11/1995 1990
145 UK London National Gallery Young Gainsborough 01/01/1996 1990
American Photography
146 UK London The Victoria and Albert Museum 1890-1965 01/11/1996 1990
147 UK London Royal Academy of Arts From Mantegna to Picasso 04/11/1996 1990
148 UK London National Gallery Seurat and the Bathers 01/03/1997 1990
Colours of the Indus:
Costumes and Textiles of
149 UK London The Victoria and Albert Museum Pakistan 01/04/1997 1990
The Berlin of Georg
150 UK London Royal Academy of Arts Grosz 02/04/1997 1990
151 UK London Royal Academy of Arts Art Treasures of England 19/01/1998 1990
152 UK London National Gallery Henry Moore 01/03/1998 1990
153 UK London National Gallery Caravaggio 01/04/1998 1990
154 UK London The Victoria and Albert Museum The Power of the Poster 01/06/1998 1990
155 UK London The Victoria and Albert Museum Aubrey Beardsley 01/08/1998 1990
156 UK London National Gallery Orazio Gentileschi 01/01/1999 1990
157 UK London Royal Academy of Arts Monet in the 20th Century 01/01/1999 1990
158 UK London National Gallery Renaissance Florence 01/07/1999 1990
159 UK London Royal Academy of Arts 1900. Art at the crossroads 01/01/2000 2000
160 UK London The Victoria and Albert Museum Art Nouveau 1890-1914 01/01/2000 2000
161 UK London Royal Academy of Arts Chardin 1699-1779 01/03/2000 2000
251
162 UK London Royal Academy of Arts The Scottish Colorist 1930 01/06/2000 2000
163 UK London Royal Academy of Arts The Genius of Rome 01/01/2001 2000
164 UK London Royal Academy of Arts Botticelli's Dante 01/03/2001 2000
165 UK London The Victoria and Albert Museum Radical Fashion 01/06/2001 2000
The Dawn of the Flawting
166 UK London Royal Academy of Arts World 20/11/2001 2000
167 UK London Royal Academy of Arts Tilson 14/01/2002 2000
168 UK London Royal Academy of Arts Paris Capital of the Arts 22/01/2002 2000
Masters of Colour: Derain
169 UK London Royal Academy of Arts to Kandinsky 27/06/2002 2000
170 UK London The Victoria and Albert Museum Versace at the V&A 01/10/2002 2000
171 UK London Royal Academy of Arts Aztecs 20/11/2002 2000
172 UK London The Victoria and Albert Museum Art Deco 1910-1939 01/03/2003 2000
173 UK London Royal Academy of Arts Pre-Raphaelite Masters 16/09/2003 2000
Illuminating the
174 UK London Royal Academy of Arts Renaissance 27/11/2003 2000
175 UK London Royal Academy of Arts Tamara de Lempicka 16/01/2004 2000
176 UK London Royal Academy of Arts The Art of Philip Guston 20/01/2004 2000
Allen Jones and David
Hockney mastermind this
year's RA summer
177 UK London Royal Academy of Arts exhibition 03/06/2004 2000
178 UK London The Victoria and Albert Museum Black British Style 01/10/2004 2000
179 UK London Royal Academy of Arts Impressionism Abroad 27/06/2005 2000
180 UK London The Victoria and Albert Museum Between Past and Future 01/09/2005 2000
181 UK London Royal Academy of Arts Rodin 30/05/2006 2000
Twilight: Photography in
182 UK London The Victoria and Albert Museum the Magic Hour 01/09/2006 2000
183 UK London National Gallery Scratch the Surface 01/05/2007 2000
The RAA 239th Summer
184 UK London Royal Academy of Arts Exhibition 06/07/2007 2000
The Golden Age of
185 UK London The Victoria and Albert Museum Couture 01/09/2007 2000
Blood on Paper: the Art of
186 UK London The Victoria and Albert Museum Book 01/03/2008 2000
VILHELM
HAMMERSHØI: THE
187 UK London Royal Academy of Arts POETRY OF SILENCE 16/04/2008 2000
Sisley in England and
188 UK London National Gallery Wales 01/08/2008 2000
189 UK London The Victoria and Albert Museum The Gilbert Collection 01/05/2009 2000
190 UK London National Gallery Titian's Triumph of Love 01/07/2009 2000
191 UK London Royal Academy of Arts Anish Kapoor 17/08/2009 2000
252
N. Country City Museum Title Date Decade
New Museum of Modern Retrospective exhibit of
1 US York Art Franklin C. Watkins 14/03/1950 1950
New Museum of Modern
2 US York Art Three Modern Styles 06/07/1950 1950
New Museum of Modern Modern War Memorial to be
3 US York Art exhibited 01/12/1950 1950
New Museum of Modern
4 US York Art MODIGLIANI 05/04/1951 1950
New Museum of Modern Selections form Stieglitz
5 US York Art Collection 16/05/1951 1950
New Museum of Modern
6 US York Art Jacques Lipchitz 12/07/1951 1950
New Museum of Modern
7 US York Art Fifteen Americans 01/02/1952 1950
New Museum of Modern
8 US York Art De Stjil 01/11/1952 1950
New Museum of Modern
9 US York Art Works by Roualt 01/01/1953 1950
The Solomon R.
New Guggenheim A Selection from the
10 US York Foundation Museum Collection 28/01/1953 1950
New Museum of Modern
11 US York Art American Photographers 01/02/1953 1950
The Solomon R.
New Guggenheim
12 US York Foundation Younger European Painters 02/12/1953 1950
New Museum of Modern 100 Masterpieces from
13 US York Art Europe 01/01/1954 1950
Los Establishment of the J. Paul
14 US Angeles J. Paul Getty Museum Getty Museum 24/02/1954 1950
New Museum of Modern New Drawings from
15 US York Art Museum Collection 01/03/1954 1950
New Museum of Modern Recent European Painting
16 US York Art and Sculpture 01/04/1955 1950
New Museum of Modern
17 US York Art New Talent 19/04/1955 1950
The Solomon R.
New Guggenheim
18 US York Foundation Alberto Giacometti 03/06/1955 1950
The Solomon R.
New Guggenheim
19 US York Foundation Constantin Brancusi 24/10/1955 1950
New Museum of Modern
20 US York Art Toulouse Lautrec 14/01/1956 1950
New Museum of Modern
21 US York Art Masters of British Painting 01/10/1956 1950
The Solomon R.
New Guggenheim
22 US York Foundation Three Brothers 18/02/1957 1950
New Museum of Modern Important Picasso
23 US York Art Exhibition 23/03/1957 1950
New Museum of Modern
24 US York Art Gaudì Exhibition on View 01/12/1957 1950
253
The Solomon R.
New Guggenheim
25 US York Foundation Piet Mondrian 09/12/1957 1950
New Museum of Modern
26 US York Art Jean Arp 12/09/1958 1950
New Museum of Modern
27 US York Art Ten European Artists 01/12/1958 1950
New Museum of Modern
28 US York Art The New American Painting 21/04/1959 1950
New Museum of Modern
29 US York Art Monet Mural 01/06/1959 1950
New Exhibition of William Blake
30 US York The Frick Collection Water Colors 15/12/1959 1950
New Museum of Modern
31 US York Art Claude Monet 09/03/1960 1960
The Solomon R.
New Guggenheim Henry Moore's Figure 1956
32 US York Foundation - 1960 27/10/1960 1960
New Museum of Modern
33 US York Art Mark Rothko Exhibit 18/01/1961 1960
The Solomon R.
New Guggenheim
34 US York Foundation Modern Masters 15/08/1961 1960
New Museum of Modern Major Retrospective on
35 US York Art Dubuffet 21/02/1962 1960
New Museum of Modern
36 US York Art Design for Sports 13/04/1962 1960
New Museum of Modern Ernst Haas. Colour
37 US York Art Photography 21/08/1962 1960
New Museum of Modern
38 US York Art Emil Nolde 01/02/1963 1960
The Solomon R.
New Guggenheim Rothko Paintings destined to
39 US York Foundation Harvard 26/03/1963 1960
New Museum of Modern
40 US York Art Rodin 01/05/1963 1960
New Museum of Modern
41 US York Art Andrè Derain 01/06/1963 1960
The Solomon R.
New Guggenheim Guggenheim International
42 US York Foundation Award Exhibition 26/12/1963 1960
New Museum of Modern
43 US York Art Art in a Changing World 26/05/1964 1960
New Museum of Modern
44 US York Art The Photographers Eye 27/05/1964 1960
New Museum of Modern
45 US York Art The Responsive Eye 25/02/1965 1960
The Solomon R.
New Guggenheim
46 US York Foundation Jean Xceron Exhibition 24/04/1965 1960
New Museum of Modern Dada, Surrealism, and their
47 US York Art Heritage 21/12/1966 1960
New Museum of Modern Five European Paintings
48 US York Art recently added 06/01/1967 1960
254
The Solomon R.
New Guggenheim Sculpture form Twenty
49 US York Foundation Nations 10/09/1967 1960
Museum of
50 US Chicago Contemporary Art Projects for Monuments 01/10/1967 1960
Museum of Pop Art pops up as 'Pop
51 US Chicago Contemporary Art Tarte' 01/11/1967 1960
Museum of
52 US Chicago Contemporary Art Dan Flavin: Pink and Gold 01/01/1968 1960
Rembrandt Drawings and
New Prints in The Frick
53 US York The Frick Collection Collection 08/01/1968 1960
Works of James Abbot
New McNeill Whistler in The
54 US York The Frick Collection Frick Collection 01/04/1968 1960
Museum of
55 US Chicago Contemporary Art Jackson Pollock Exhibition 08/05/1968 1960
New Museum of Modern
56 US York Art The Art of the Real 03/07/1968 1960
The Solomon R.
New Guggenheim
57 US York Foundation Harold Tovish Exhibition 05/10/1968 1960
New Museum of Modern
58 US York Art Julio Gonzales 22/01/1969 1960
The Solomon R.
New Guggenheim Roy Lichtenstein at the
59 US York Foundation Guggenheim 27/08/1969 1960
Museum of
60 US Chicago Contemporary Art Art by Telephone 23/10/1969 1960
New Museum of Modern
61 US York Art Joan Mirò: fifty recent prints 01/01/1970 1970
New Museum of Modern Photographs by Walker
62 US York Art Evans 27/01/1971 1970
The Solomon R.
New Guggenheim Sixth International
63 US York Foundation Guggenheim Exhibition 29/01/1971 1970
The Solomon R.
New Guggenheim
64 US York Foundation Robert Mangold Exhibition 11/03/1971 1970
New Museum of Modern Picasso at the Museum of
65 US York Art Modern Art 03/02/1972 1970
The Solomon R.
New Guggenheim
66 US York Foundation Joan Mirò: Magnetic Fields 09/09/1972 1970
The Solomon R.
New Guggenheim
67 US York Foundation Dubuffet Exhibition 09/04/1973 1970
New Loan Exhibition of Italian
68 US York The Frick Collection Paintings 10/05/1973 1970
New Museum of Modern Ellsworth Kelly
69 US York Art Retrospective 12/09/1973 1970
New Museum of Modern
70 US York Art New Japanese Photography 27/03/1974 1970
Museum of
71 US Chicago Contemporary Art Two Unusual Exhibitions 24/06/1974 1970
255
The Solomon R.
New Guggenheim
72 US York Foundation Jesus Rafael Soto Exhibition 28/10/1974 1970
Los Special exhibit "Splendors
73 US Angeles J. Paul Getty Museum of Ancient Rome" 20/11/1974 1970
New Museum of Modern Edward Weston
74 US York Art Retrospective 29/01/1975 1970
The Solomon R.
New Guggenheim
75 US York Foundation Max Ersnt: a Retrospective 01/02/1975 1970
Museum of
76 US Chicago Contemporary Art Bodyworks 27/02/1975 1970
Los
77 US Angeles J. Paul Getty Museum Rodin’s Rodin 10/11/1975 1970
Los 18th Century France: The
78 US Angeles J. Paul Getty Museum Height of Fashion 10/01/1976 1970
New Museum of Modern
79 US York Art Cubism and Its Affinities 25/02/1976 1970
New Museum of Modern
80 US York Art Tina Modotti 10/01/1977 1970
Museum of
81 US Chicago Contemporary Art Lee Bontecou 01/03/1977 1970
Armand Hammer collection
Los to be exhibited at the Getty
82 US Angeles J. Paul Getty Museum Museum 25/07/1977 1970
Museum of
83 US Chicago Contemporary Art A View of a decade 03/10/1977 1970
New Museum of Modern
84 US York Art Sol Lewitt 01/01/1978 1970
Los
85 US Angeles J. Paul Getty Museum Getty Bronze now on exhibit 11/04/1978 1970
Los Renaissance and Baroque
86 US Angeles J. Paul Getty Museum drawings 11/04/1978 1970
New Severo Calzetta, called
87 US York The Frick Collection Severo da ravenna 15/06/1978 1970
J. PAUL GETTY
MUSEUM TO OFFER
Los special decorative arts
88 US Angeles J. Paul Getty Museum exhibition 16/01/1979 1970
Museum of
89 US Chicago Contemporary Art Wall Painting 13/03/1979 1970
New Museum of Modern
90 US York Art David Hockney Etchings 01/04/1979 1970
New Woodcarvings on view at
91 US York The Frick Collection The Frick Collection 01/09/1979 1970
Los
92 US Angeles J. Paul Getty Museum Venetian Art exhibition 10/10/1979 1970
The Solomon R.
New Guggenheim
93 US York Foundation First Beuys Survey 01/11/1979 1970
New Museum of Modern Pablo Picasso: a
94 US York Art Retrospective 01/05/1980 1980
New Vincennes and Sèvres
95 US York The Frick Collection Porcelain at The Frick 01/05/1980 1980
256
Museum of
96 US Chicago Contemporary Art German Realism 20/10/1980 1980
Los Archaeological Photography
97 US Angeles J. Paul Getty Museum 1865-1914 24/10/1980 1980
New Museum of Modern
98 US York Art Inside Spaces 01/02/1981 1980
The Solomon R.
New Guggenheim
99 US York Foundation Major Gorky Retrospective 01/02/1981 1980
Los Michelangelo to Gericault:
100 US Angeles J. Paul Getty Museum Valton Exhibition 09/09/1981 1980
New Museum of Modern
101 US York Art Giorgio de Chirico 01/02/1982 1980
New
102 US York The Frick Collection Rembrandt Etchings 31/03/1982 1980
The Solomon R.
New Guggenheim
103 US York Foundation Yves Klein Retrospective 15/10/1982 1980
Museum of
104 US Chicago Contemporary Art Season's release 07/01/1983 1980
The Solomon R. Acquisitions Priorities:
New Guggenheim Aspects of Postwar Painting
105 US York Foundation in Europe 15/04/1983 1980
New Museum of Modern First international touring
106 US York Art exhibition on videoart 01/07/1983 1980
The Solomon R.
New Guggenheim Picasso: the Last Years,
107 US York Foundation 1963-1973 27/02/1984 1980
New Museum of Modern
108 US York Art Irving penn 01/08/1984 1980
The Solomon R.
New Guggenheim
109 US York Foundation Ree Morton 28/02/1985 1980
New Museum of Modern Retrospective of Kurt
110 US York Art Schwitters 01/06/1985 1980
Museum of
111 US Chicago Contemporary Art Mies Van der Rohe 19/03/1986 1980
The Solomon R.
New Guggenheim Angles of Vision: French
112 US York Foundation Art Today 26/06/1986 1980
Los Edward Weston’s Los
113 US Angeles J. Paul Getty Museum Angeles Period 23/10/1986 1980
New Museum of Modern
114 US York Art Paul Klee 01/11/1986 1980
The Solomon R.
New Guggenheim
115 US York Foundation Joan Mirò: a Retrospective 14/05/1987 1980
New Museum of Modern Henri Cartier Bresson: the
116 US York Art early Works 01/08/1987 1980
New Museum of Modern Deconstructivist
117 US York Art Architecture 01/02/1988 1980
Museum of
118 US Chicago Contemporary Art Gerhard Richter: Paintings 18/04/1988 1980
119 US Los J. Paul Getty Museum After the Manner of 27/07/1988 1980
257
Angeles Women: Photographs
Los 150 Years of Photography
120 US Angeles J. Paul Getty Museum Surveyed 15/11/1988 1980
New Museum of Modern Andy Warhol: a
121 US York Art Retrospective 01/02/1989 1980
New
122 US York The Frick Collection Francois-Marius Granet 01/09/1989 1980
The Solomon R. Major exhibition of
New Guggenheim American Artist Jenny
123 US York Foundation Holzer 11/12/1989 1980
New Museum of Modern
124 US York Art Tina Barney 01/01/1990 1990
The Solomon R.
New Guggenheim Jenny Holzer held over
125 US York Foundation through February 25 13/02/1990 1990
New Seventeenth-century
126 US York The Frick Collection Chinese Porcelain 21/05/1990 1990
New Museum of Modern
127 US York Art The Art of the 1940s 01/02/1991 1990
Los August Sander: Faces of the
128 US Angeles J. Paul Getty Museum German People 26/03/1991 1990
16th and 17th Century
Los Northern European
129 US Angeles J. Paul Getty Museum Drawings 10/05/1991 1990
Museum of Memory and Metaphor: the
130 US Chicago Contemporary Art Art of Romare Bearden 01/08/1991 1990
New Museum of Modern
131 US York Art Kaj Franck Designer 01/04/1992 1990
The Solomon R.
New Guggenheim Robert Rauschenberg: the
132 US York Foundation early 1950s 05/10/1992 1990
Los Camille Silvy’s “River
133 US Angeles J. Paul Getty Museum Scene, France,” 14/10/1992 1990
Museum of
134 US Chicago Contemporary Art Conceptual Photography 18/12/1992 1990
New Museum of Modern Philip Lorca-di Corcia:
135 US York Art Strangers 01/03/1993 1990
The Solomon R.
New Guggenheim First Major Rebecca Horn
136 US York Foundation Survey 28/05/1993 1990
Renaissance and Baroque
Los drawings by European
137 US Angeles J. Paul Getty Museum artists 03/12/1993 1990
New Museum of Modern Major Retrospective of
138 US York Art Frank Lloyd Wright 01/02/1994 1990
Los 16th Century Ornamental
139 US Angeles J. Paul Getty Museum Designs 22/04/1994 1990
Los
140 US Angeles J. Paul Getty Museum A Passion for Antiquities 28/04/1994 1990
New The Solomon R.
141 US York Guggenheim F. Feliz Gonzales-Torres 01/11/1994 1990
New Museum of Modern
142 US York Art Bruce Nauman 01/02/1995 1990
258
The Solomon R.
New Guggenheim First comprehensive survey
143 US York Foundation on Gonzales -Torres 03/02/1995 1990
Los
144 US Angeles J. Paul Getty Museum Devotion and Desire 07/07/1995 1990
Museum of Andres Serrano: Works
145 US Chicago Contemporary Art 1983-1993 07/12/1995 1990
Los Doris Ulmann: Photography
146 US Angeles J. Paul Getty Museum and Folklore 04/03/1996 1990
New Museum of Modern Willem De kooning: the
147 US York Art Late Paintings 01/11/1996 1990
New Museum of Modern The Photomontages of
148 US York Art Hannah Hoch 01/02/1997 1990
New Museum of Modern Photography of Khmer
149 US York Art Rouge Prisoners 01/05/1997 1990
New Museum of Modern
150 US York Art Alvar Aalto 01/01/1998 1990
The Solomon R.
New Guggenheim
151 US York Foundation China: 5.000 years 15/01/1998 1990
Los
152 US Angeles J. Paul Getty Museum Daguerreotypes 27/03/1998 1990
Los Design of a modern
153 US Angeles J. Paul Getty Museum architectural milestone 19/03/1999 1990
New Museum of Modern
154 US York Art Fame after Photography mag-99 1990
New Museum of Modern
155 US York Art JEAN ARP 01/03/2000 2000
New
156 US York J. Paul Getty Museum Windsor Raphael Drawings 06/06/2000 2000
New
157 US York J. Paul Getty Museum Drawing the Landscape 18/12/2000 2000
The Solomon R.
New Guggenheim
158 US York Foundation The Global Guggenheim 18/12/2000 2000
New
159 US York J. Paul Getty Museum August Sander 23/02/2001 2000
New
160 US York J. Paul Getty Museum Walker Evans Exhibition 25/04/2001 2000
The Solomon R.
New Guggenheim
161 US York Foundation Sugimoto: Portraits 13/07/2001 2000
New Museum of Modern
162 US York Art Tempo 01/06/2002 2000
New
163 US York J. Paul Getty Museum Recent Works by Bill Viola 23/09/2002 2000
New Museum of Modern
164 US York Art Matisse Picasso 01/02/2003 2000
New
165 US York J. Paul Getty Museum American Photography 01/05/2003 2000
The Solomon R.
New Guggenheim James Rosenquist: A
166 US York Foundation Retrospective 10/10/2003 2000
259
The Solomon R.
New Guggenheim Brancusi: The Essence of
167 US York Foundation Things 19/03/2004 2000
New
168 US York J. Paul Getty Museum The Arts of Fire 23/03/2004 2000
New Museum of Modern Fashioning Fiction in
169 US York Art Photography since 1990 01/04/2004 2000
New Museum of Modern
170 US York Art Thomas Demand 01/03/2005 2000
The Solomon R.
New Guggenheim
171 US York Foundation David Smith: A Centennial 29/07/2005 2000
New Museum of Modern Edvard Munch: The Modern
172 US York Art Life of the Soul 14/02/2006 2000
New
173 US York J. Paul Getty Museum Ensor's Graphic Modernism 25/04/2006 2000
The Solomon R.
New Guggenheim Lucio Fontana: Venice/New
174 US York Foundation York 28/07/2006 2000
New
175 US York J. Paul Getty Museum Medieval Beasts 13/04/2007 2000
The Solomon R.
New Guggenheim
176 US York Foundation Richard Pousette-Dart 15/06/2007 2000
New
177 US York J. Paul Getty Museum The Colour of Life 11/02/2008 2000
The Solomon R.
New Guggenheim Cai Guo-Qiang: I Want to
178 US York Foundation Believe 21/02/2008 2000
The Solomon R.
New Guggenheim PHOTOGRAPHER
179 US York Foundation CATHERINE OPIE 14/03/2008 2000
New REFURBISHMENT OF
180 US York The Frick Collection FRICK LIVING HALL 30/05/2008 2000
New
181 US York The Frick Collection NEW ACQUISITION 06/10/2008 2000
New
182 US York The Frick Collection Frick’s Vermeer reunited 29/10/2008 2000
New
183 US York The Frick Collection LOAN COLLABORATION 08/12/2008 2000
The Solomon R.
New Guggenheim
184 US York Foundation Julieta Aranda 29/03/2009 2000
New Whistler in The Frick
185 US York The Frick Collection Collection 30/04/2009 2000
New
186 US York J. Paul Getty Museum Golden Graves of Vani 25/06/2009 2000
The Solomon R.
New Guggenheim
187 US York Foundation Tino Sehgal 21/12/2009 2000
260
